Libido & Sexual Function Supplement
Guide

Written By: Michael Hull, & Wyatt Brown

Edited By: Pierre-Alexandre Sicart

Reviewed By: Kamal Patel

Table of Contents

Introduction

Combos

Primary Supplements

Secondary Supplements

Promising Supplements

Unproven Supplements

Inadvisable Supplements

FAQ

2

Introduction

In this guide, we will address two aspects of sexuality: libido (or sex drive: the general desire for sex) and

arousal (a stimulated libido and its external signs, such as erections).

 Digging Deeper: A chemical mess

Numerous neurotransmitters and hormones are involved in the brain’s complex interplay of excitation

and inhibition. There’s still a lot we don’t know, but with regard to excitation, we can point to the

dopaminergic reward system as the main orchestrator of desire, with testosterone and estrogen also

playing a role in the disposition toward sexual desire.

Meanwhile, serotonin, prolactin, opioids, and endocannabinoids, which mediate pleasure and

satisfaction, are largely inhibitory.[1][2] This may be why the use of antidepressants that increase

serotonin signaling (such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors SSRIs) and the abuse of alcohol

and opioids are associated with reduced libido: pleasure is frequently achieved without sexual

activity and downregulates desire, perhaps even separating it from sexual activity.[3][4][5]

Finally, different aspects of physical arousal involve different neurotransmitters (notably

norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and histamine) and of course the sex hormones (notably testosterone

and estrogen, which, as we said, also play a role in the original disposition toward desire).

Libido

Libido basics

Your libido is your sex drive—your desire for sex. Having a low libido isn’t always a problem. Some people

with low libido simply don’t care, or they even consider themselves lucky when they see the trouble so

many get into because of sex. But for others, a low libido is a cause of low self-esteem or even distress,

and in relationships it can lead to friction when one of the partners’ libido is much higher than the other’s

(an overactive libido, by the way, can also be a problem, but not one we’ll address in this guide).

When a person with low libido suffers clinically significant distress because of it, the problem is classified

as hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).

Low libido is more common than full-blown HSDD. Low libido is found in 37.7% of females, according to

the most notable study, while HSDD affects a rather vaguely estimated 7–12% of females. HSDD is more

prevalent in the decades after menopause (females aged 45–65) than in seniors (65+), probably because

seniors whose libidio is low are less likely to suffer clinically significant distress because of it.[6]

In males, the picture is even less clear: while reports of low desire are also common, distress and

3

 
 
interpersonal difficulties have been insufficiently evaluated, which makes it hard to estimate the prevalence

of HSDD.[7] Estimates of HSDD prevalence in males have varied widely, from under 3% to around 15%.[8][9]

And to muddle the matter even more for both sexes, there’s the possibility of underreporting and the

possibility of people being negatively affected by their low libido without their distress being high enough

for their problem to be classified as HSDD.

External factors

HSDD can be caused by a combination of physiological, psychological, and social factors. For good and for

bad, the various aspects of life and health constantly affect one another.

Some 34–40% of females with depression also have HSDD.[10][11] Is HSDD leading to depression or

depression to HSDD? Both can probably happen. We know, however, that relationship difficulties aren’t the

primary cause of HSDD, since only a minority of patients with both depression and HSDD reported

relationship difficulties.

It makes sense that depression would lower sex drive, as it lowers drive in general (depressed people find it

hard to get motivated by anything, or sometimes even to want anything). Also, reduced libido is a common

adverse effect of antidepressants,[3][5] but we should note here that antidepressants cannot explain all cases

of low libido in depressed people.

Likewise, it makes sense that many people with HSDD report simultaneous fatigue, and even fatigue as a

reason for it,[12][13][14][15] and that stress and anxiety are also cited as reasons for HSDD.[13][14][16] Relatedly,

insomnia is a common feature of depression, is often caused by anxiety, and leads to fatigue.[17]

People with low libido who suffer from depression, fatigue, anxiety, insomnia, or stress may want to

address those issues as a first step (and maybe the only one necessary) to increase their libido. It is also

possible that an increase in libido could lead to an increase in well-being, leading to a decrease in

depression, fatigue, anxiety, insomnia, and stress.

You can think of it as a “chicken or egg” situation, but it’s more of a vicious or virtuous circle: as we

mentioned earlier, the various aspects of life and health are interrelated, so it is possible for depression and

HSDD to feed each other; but by the same token, if you manage to alleviate one or the other, or maybe

both in different ways, the improvements can feed each other until you end up turning a vicious circle into a

virtuous one.

 Caution: Don’t self-diagnose

Diagnosing mental disorders is complicated, so don’t self-diagnose. If you suspect you suffer from

anxiety, depression, HSDD, or any other mental disorder, get the opinion of a mental-health clinician

or your primary care physician.

Arousal

4

 
Aside from low libido, the other major sexual dysfunction consists in problems achieving and maintaining

arousal. Arousal refers to libido stimulation as well as to the physiological changes associated with it —

such as erection, vaginal lubrication, genital sensitivity, and various other phenomena.

For both males and females, blood flow to sexual organs is one of the major features of arousal, and this is

mediated through nitric oxide (NO),[18][19] a chemical that signals blood vessels to widen (i.e., dilate).

Sildenafil (Viagra) works by increasing NO signaling,[20] though not by affecting nitric oxide synthase (NOS),

the enzyme responsible for producing NO.

On the other hand, the effect of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) can be enhanced by compounds present in a

wide variety of plants,[21] and your body makes NO from the nitrate in your food or from the amino acid

arginine. It follows that some foods and supplements can help with, not just male erections, but also clitoral

and vaginal blood flow.[19]

However, since the sex hormones estrogen and testosterone help orchestrate NO production in the

genitals,[19][22] if your underlying issue is hormonal, those foods and supplements may not help you. The path

to solving your sexual-function issues may start with addressing a root cause a step or two removed from

the hormonal deficiency itself, such as obesity and insulin resistance.[23] If you don’t know where to start,

talk to an endocrinologist.

5

Role of estrogen on clitoral and vaginal blood flow

Adapted from Musicki et al. J Sex Med. 2009.[19] eNOS = endothelial nitric oxide synthase, Cav-1 = caveolin-1, P = phosphorylation

It’s all quite complicated, and everyone’s situation is unique, but we hope that this guide will help you make

informed choices and see improvements in your sexual and overall health.

Wyatt Brown, Researcher

6

Combos

 Caution: Read this before taking any supplement

Some sexual aids, such as yohimbine and sildenafil (aka Viagra), have stimulatory properties. Taking

those with other stimulants (or any other compound liable to increase diastolic blood pressure) can

increase the risk of cardiovascular injury.

If you experience an erection that lasts for more than four hours, see your physician immediately to

avoid permanent penile damage.

Core Combo

To keep a healthy libido, you should minimize stress and maintain good habits with regard to sleep, diet,

and exercise (intense cardiovascular activity is particularly beneficial). Making positive lifestyle changes

should be a priority before supplementation is considered.

There is only one core supplement: maca. Take 2–3 g of maca root powder at breakfast. Pursue this

protocol for a month before you consider making any modification.

 Tip: Try one combo alone for a few weeks

Taking too many supplements at once may prevent you from determining which ones are truly

working. Start with just one of the combos suggested here for a couple of weeks before you

consider making any modification, such as adding another supplement, altering a supplements

dosage, or incorporating the supplements from an additional combo.

When adding another supplement to your regimen, be methodical. For example, you may wish to

take all the supplements from two combos. Select the combo that you wish to try first and take this

for a couple of weeks. Then, add one supplement from the second combo and wait another week to

see how it affects you. Continue this process until you’ve added all the supplements you wish to.

If a supplement appears in two combos you wish to combine, don’t stack the doses; instead,

combine the ranges. For instance, if the range is 2–4 mg in one combo and 3–6 mg in the other, your

new range becomes 2–6 mg. Always start with the lower end of the range — especially in this case,

since the reason why one of the ranges has a lower ceiling in one combo may be due to a synergy

with another supplement in the same combo. Reading through the full supplement entry may help

you decide which dose to aim for, but if you’re not sure, lower is usually safer.

Specialized Combos

7

For males and females who want to increase
their libido

Take the core maca (2–3 g) at breakfast. If after a month your problem is not solved, add either fenugreek

(in the form of an extract standardized for 300 mg of saponins), Eurycoma longifolia (200–300 mg of a

100:1 extract), or Tribulus terrestris (200–450 mg of an extract standardized for 60% steroidal saponins);

you should not cumulate those three libido boosters, but you can rotate them once a month.

For males without erectile dysfunction who
want to improve their erectile rigidity

Take the core maca (2–3 g) at breakfast. If after a month your problem is not solved, take 5,000 mg of L-

arginine, with or without food. L-arginine can be combined with yohimbine (0.2 mg per kilogram of

bodyweight, so about 0.09 mg/lb) about 30 minutes before sexual activity.

For males with untreated erectile dysfunction
caused by impaired blood flow

Take the core maca (2–3 g) at breakfast. If after a month your problem is not solved, add 5,000 mg per

day of L-arginine and 1 g per day of cocoa polyphenols.

Should the cocoa polyphenols fail to help you after a month, you could try replacing them by Pycnogenol

(100–200 mg). Should the Pycnogenol fail to help you after a month, you could try replacing it by a grape

seed extract (200–400 mg). Take your Pycnogenol or grape seed extract once a day with food.

8

Primary Supplements

Maca

What makes maca a primary supplement

The majority of studies show that maca, a root vegetable, enhances libido in male and female

adults.[24][25][26][27][28][29] Libido may keep improving for up to 8 weeks before plateauing. It should be noted that

maca has shown promise for postmenopausal females,[27] an oft-overlooked population when it comes to

libido enhancement.

Maca vs. placebo on sexual desire in healthy men

Reference: Gonzales et al. Andrologia. 2002.[24]

Maca may serve to treat sexual dysfunction caused by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and

serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs),[26][27] types of antidepressants. It can also mildly

benefit males with erectile dysfunction from other causes.

Maca is not known to interact with any major hormones (such as DHEA, estrogen, or testosterone) or any

pharmaceuticals. To date, however, research into maca’s potential adverse effects is somewhat limited.

How to take maca

Take 2–3 grams of maca root powder at breakfast.

For the purpose of improving libido, there does not appear to be a notable difference between red, black,

and yellow maca. However, red and black maca are the more well-studied forms.

9

 Tip: Why don’t you recommend brands or specific products?

For two reasons:

We don’t test physical products. What our researchers do — all day, every day — is analyze

peer-reviewed studies on supplements and nutrition.

We go to great lengths to protect our integrity. As you’ve probably noticed, we don’t sell

supplements, or even show ads from supplement companies, even though either option

would generate a lot more money than our Supplement Guides ever will — and for a lot less

work, too.

If we recommended any brands or specific products, our integrity would be called into question, so

… we can’t do it. That being said, in the interest of keeping you safe, we drew a short list of steps

you should take if a product has caught your interest.

10

Secondary Supplements

Arginine

What makes arginine a secondary option

Nitric oxide (NO) is composed of nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O). Your body creates NO out of the arginine

and nitrate in your food. NO plays a major signaling role in vascular relaxation, and elevated levels are

associated with better blood flow.

Several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have tested oral arginine for mild to moderate erectile

dysfunction (ED), but usually in combination with other supplements. Of the 10 RCTs (540 participants)

included in a 2019 meta-analysis,[30]

3 RCTs used arginine alone.

2 RCTs used arginine with pycnogenol.

2 RCTs used arginine with yohimbe.

1 RCT used arginine with adenosine monophosphate (AMP).

1 RCT used arginine with citrulline.

1 RCT used arginine with ornithine.

Compared to placebo or no treatment, arginine was found to improve ED, overall satisfaction, intercourse

satisfaction, and orgasmic function, but not sexual desire. These benefits were increased when arginine was

combined with other supplements.

11

 
Odds of ED improvement with arginine

Reference: Rhim et al. J Sex Med. 2019[30]

Warnings about arginine

In the 10 RCTs included in the aforementioned 2019 meta-analysis, the overall rate of adverse effects was

8.3% in the arginine groups and 2.4% in the placebo groups. In the 3 RCTs on arginine alone, the overall

rate of adverse effects (headaches, insomnia, and itching) was 2% in the arginine groups and 0% in the

placebo groups.

Talk to a medical professional before you decide to supplement with arginine, especially if you had a heart

attack, if you have asthma or allergies, or if you take anticoagulants, antiplatelets, diabetes medication, or

hypertension medication.[31]

12

 Digging Deeper: Study discrepancies

Arginine is known as a “NO booster” — a supplement that boosts NO levels. Yet studies on exercise

performance found that supplementing with arginine had little effect on arginine levels in the blood.

In our Muscle Gain & Exercise Performance guide, we even say that “absorption of arginine by the

intestines is limited, and much is eliminated from the body before it can reach the muscles”.

But then, why does it work for ED?

We don’t know. It may be that people with ED have suboptimal NO levels, and that their bodies are

more likely to seize on any extra arginine to make more NO. It may be that, if people with ED really

have suboptimal NO levels, even a little increase in NO can have a notable effect. It is possible … to

keep guessing, but until studies bring some light on this topic, any guess is just that: a guess.

How to take arginine

Take 5,000 mg per day of L-arginine, with or without food.

If you experience headache or itching, take two 2,500 milligram doses separated by at least a few hours (4

or more). Consuming the single or split doses with food may also alleviate these adverse effects.

If you experience insomnia, take arginine in the morning.

 Digging Deeper: Arginine vs. Viagra

L-arginine has similar effects to Viagra (sildenafil) — a PDE-5 inhibitor — that are lower in magnitude

when compared using scores taken from the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) scale.[32]

For example, the meta-analysis discussed above found that L-arginine increased overall erectile

function scores by 2.36 points for arginine alone and 5.11 points for arginine in combination with

other supplements. By comparison, a meta-analysis of 4,836 males with ED saw a 9.65 point

improvement in those taking Viagra.[33] Other PDE-5 inhibitors, such as tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca) and

vardenafil (Levitra, Staxyn), saw a 8.52 and 7.50 point improvement, respectively.[33]

Viagra does seem to have a higher rate of adverse effects, with one meta-analysis of 14 trials

reporting rates of flushing (12%), headache (11%), indigestion (i.e., dyspepsia) (5%), and visual

disturbances (3%).[34]

Cocoa

13

 
What makes cocoa a primary option

Low nitric oxide (NO) levels can cause blood vessels to narrow, leading to poor circulation, which can result

in erections that are softer and more difficult to maintain. Like the flavonoids in grape seed and pine bark,

(-)-epicatechin and other flavonoids in cocoa can help support NO levels, thus improving blood flow and

alleviating this cause of erectile dysfunction.

Judging from a study on a grape seed extract, the improvement in blood flow from cocoa might be

negated by the flavonoid quercetin, whose concurrent supplementation should therefore be avoided.

Classification hierarchy of polyphenols

How to take cocoa

Take 1 g of cocoa polyphenols, for instance by consuming about 30 g of cocoa powder or 40 g of dark

chocolate with a 75% cocoa content. Neither milk chocolate nor white chocolate is a good source of

polyphenols.

Yohimbine

What makes yohimbine a secondary option

Yohimbine is an alkaloid found in the bark of the African tree yohimbe (Pausinystalia johimbe). It is a

stimulant often used as a fat burner. It is also supplemented by males wishing to increase virility and

erectile rigidity.

Yohimbine can have a variety of adverse effects, such as elevated heart rate and anxiety. In fact, studies on

anxiety commonly use yohimbine to induce anxiety. In people with panic disorders, it can even induce panic

attacks. Anyone susceptible to anxiety should steer clear of yohimbine.

Yohimbine should not be used alongside antipsychotics. It should not be used alongside antidepressants,

14

 
such as monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). It should not be used by

people who treat their migraines with ergotamine.

Yohimbine must be used carefully, especially when combined with other stimulants, such as caffeine or

synephrine. People unaccustomed to stimulants should avoid yohimbine.

Yohimbine is not a reliable treatment for chronic erectile dysfunction, so it should only be used by

otherwise healthy males looking for a sexual boost. Although sometimes called “herbal Viagra”, it is less

effective than sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio) or tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca). These two pro-erectile drugs are also

safer, so they can be used instead of yohimbine.

Although sildenafil and tadalafil make for better erections, they have no direct effect on libido (sex drive).

Yohimbine might have a direct, positive effect on libido, but more research is needed to confirm this

benefit, which at best appears unreliable.

 Digging Deeper: Erections 101

The main mechanism responsible for an erection is an increase in arterial blood flow to the penis

through relaxation of the arterial and smooth muscle in the corpus cavernosum, which is spongy

tissue running down the length of the penis.[35] When the smooth muscle relaxes, blood flow increases

into the corpus cavernosum, causing an erection.

Disruption in this process is the primary cause of ED. Therapeutic agents for ED are aimed at

restoring normal vascular function, specifically vasodilation, the widening of blood vessels via

relaxation of smooth muscle cells in the vasculature.

Nitric oxide (NO) is the molecule that is responsible for vasodilation in the penis and is the primary

target of many pharmaceutical agents. NO works by causing cyclic guanosine monophosphate

(cGMP) release inside cells, which signals for smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilation, allowing

more blood to flow into the penis, thereby causing erections.[36]

Erections are sustained until cGMP is broken down by another molecule, phosphodiesterase (PDE).

PDE-5 inhibitors, like sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio), are the main pharmaceutical agent used to treat

ED.[37] However, headaches, indigestion, abdominal pain, and flushing are common adverse effects of

PDE-5 inhibitors.[37] Furthermore, these drugs don’t work in some people.[38] These issues mean that

there’s room for other possible therapies to improve ED.

15

The basic physiology of erections

Adapted from Ghofrani et al. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004.[39]

How to take yohimbine

To supplement yohimbine by itself, without other stimulants, take 0.2 mg of yohimbine per kilogram of

bodyweight (0.09 mg/lb). The table below provides the proper dose by bodyweight.

If you take other stimulants, reduce the yohimbine dose by half. Despite being a stimulant, yohimbine does

not seem to impair sleep, but should your body tell you otherwise, pay heed and avoid supplementation too

16

close to bedtime.

WEIGHT
(kg/lb)

45 / 100

57 / 125

68 / 150

79 / 175

91 / 200

102 / 225

113 / 250

125 / 275

Yohimbine intake

FULL DOSE
(mg)

9

11

14

16

18

20

23

25

HALF DOSE
(mg)

4.5

5.5

7

8

9

10

11.5

12.5

Yohimbine has fewer side-effects than yohimbe (bark powder). For that reason, and because the yohimbine

content of yohimbe can vary greatly, supplementing yohimbine is considered safer than supplementing

yohimbe. However, companies selling “yohimbine” often use a bark extract whose yohimbine content has

been estimated rather than assessed via testing, so the actual yohimbine content of a product can differ

dangerously from the number on the label. Should you decide to supplement yohimbine, start with the

lowest possible dose (often, 2.5 mg), then slowly work your way up.

17

Promising Supplements

Eurycoma Longifolia Jack

What makes Eurycoma longifolia a promising
option

Eurycoma longifolia is also known by several other names, such as longjack and tongkat ali. Preliminary

evidence supports its traditional use as a libido enhancer for both males and females, but more research is

needed to make it more than a promising option.

The sexually sluggish male rat

References: Zanoli et al. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009.[40] ● Ismali et al. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012.[41]

Preliminary evidence also supports the use of Eurycoma longifolia as a male fertility enhancer. This herb

does not seem to increase testosterone, however, or only to a small extent in males suffering from infertility

or severe erectile dysfunction. If it does increase testosterone in infertile men, its antioxidant content may

be responsible, since vitamin E and coenzyme Q10 have the same effect.

How to take Eurycoma longifolia

To supplement Eurycoma longifolia, take 200–300 mg of a 100:1 extract (concentrated for eurycomanone)

daily, preferably in two separate doses.

18

 
 
Fenugreek

What makes fenugreek a promising option

In Ayurvedic medicine, fenugreek is called methi (its Hindi name) and it’s used notably to increase virility.

While the leaves and seeds are both used, most supplements favor the seeds.

When supplemented by healthy males, high doses of fenugreek appear to significantly increase libido and

sexual satisfaction. A small increase in testosterone was noted in some studies, but not in others. When

dihydrotestosterone (DHT) was assessed, no significant change was reported.

Graphic summary of trials on fenugreek and testosterone

References: Steels et al. Phytother Res. 2011.[42] ● Wilborn et al. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2010.[43] ● Poole et al. J Int Soc

Sports Nutr. 2010.[44] ● Wilborn et al. MSSE. 2009. DOI:10.1249/01.MSS.0000355250.80465.30

Fenugreek has the interesting property of causing bodily fluids (saliva, semen, sweat, urine ...) to smell like

maple syrup.

 More importantly, fenugreek contains coumarin, a blood-thinning compound that could

19

interact with blood-thinning medication, such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) and acenocoumarol

(Sintrom).

How to take fenugreek

Take a fenugreek supplement standardized for 300 mg of saponins. If you purchase a product with

Testofen®, aim for 600 mg of this proprietary extract.

Procyanidins

What makes procyanidins a promising option

Low nitric oxide (NO) levels can cause blood vessels to narrow, leading to poor circulation, which can result

in erections that are softer and more difficult to maintain. Like the flavonoids in cocoa, procyanidins and

other flavonoids in pine bark and grape seeds can help support NO levels, thus improving blood flow and

alleviating this type of erectile dysfunction.

Pycnogenol®, a patented pine bark extract standardized to 65–75% procyanidin, is the best-studied source

of procyanidins. Grape seed extracts are cheaper, but their benefits to blood flow are less reliable and

could take longer to develop (up to one month). To improve blood flow, Pycnogenol is a better choice than

a grape seed extract, but neither option is as potent as cocoa or can boast as much supporting evidence.

The flavonoid quercetin may negate the improvement in blood flow from grape seed extracts (and, by

extension, from pine bark extracts). Concurrent supplementation should therefore be avoided.

How to take procyanidins

To supplement Pycnogenol, take 100–200 mg once a day with food.

To supplement a grape seed extract, take 200–400 mg once a day with food.

Tribulus Terrestris

What makes Tribulus terrestris a promising
option

Tribulus terrestris is an herb that has been used in Iranian, Persian, Turkish, Sudanese, Indian Ayurveda, and

Traditional Chinese Medicine to treat an assortment of diseases. Tribulus terrestris has long been marketed

as an herbal testosterone booster, with no supporting evidence. This herb may enhance libido, though,

which convinces many males that their testosterone has increased.

20

 
 
No difference in testosterone with _Tribulus terrestris_
supplementation

Reference: Neychev and Mitev. J Ethnopharmacol. 2005.[45]

Little research has been conducted on the effects of herbs on libido, which is why even the most promising

among them can only be promisding options.

How to take Tribulus terrestris

To supplement Tribulus terrestris, take 200–450 mg of an extract standardized for 60% steroidal saponins

once a day with food.

21

Unproven Supplements

Of the supplements we have reviewed, none currently fit the above description.

Keep in mind that all libido boosters are overhyped to some extent. Sexual enhancement is a lucrative

market, so unsubstantiated claims are numerous. As a rule, avoid “proprietary blends” that can hide from

you how much of each ingredient you are actually getting.

22

Inadvisable Supplements

Libido Enhancers and Testosterone
Boosters

What makes libido enhancers and testosterone
boosters inadvisable supplements

The sexual enhancement and muscle building categories make up much of the supplement market. Not

surprisingly, these two categories are most likely to be tainted with unauthorized drugs (intentionally, in

some cases). Particular caution and skepticism should be given to any supplement sporting these marketing

claims.

There is precious little human evidence to support the efficacy of testosterone boosters. Studies are

seldom replicated, and when replicated seldom draw the same conclusions. Furthermore, even if a

supplement can coax your body into producing more testosterone, it can only do so within your

physiological limits — do not expect steroid-like effects.

Some supplements claiming to boost testosterone — including maca, fenugreek, and Tribulus terrestris —

actually enhance libido. People often assume that an increase in libido reflects an increase in testosterone

or vice versa. This is not always true. An increase in libido can be achieved even with no change in

testosterone while an increase in testosterone doesn’t necessarily translate into an increased libido

(although it can, in some cases).

Nicotine

What makes nicotine an inadvisable
supplement

Nicotine — and cigarette smoking in particular — can reduce arousal in both males and females[46][47][48][49]

For males specifically, regular cigarette consumption is a risk factor for erectile dysfunction[50] and may

reduce fertility.[51]

23

 
 
FAQ

Q. What about the supplements not covered in
this guide?

Our guides are regularly updated, often with new supplements. We prioritize assessing (and reassessing)

the most popular of them and those most likely to work. However, if there is a specific supplement you’d

like to see covered in a future update, please let us know by filling out this survey.

Q. Can I add a supplement not covered in this
guide to my combo?

Supplement with your current combo for a few weeks before attempting any change. Talk to your physician

and research each potential addition. Check for known negative interactions with other supplements and

pharmaceuticals in your current combo, but also for synergies. If two supplements are synergistic or

additive in their effects, you might want to use lower doses of each.

Q. Can I modify the recommended doses?

If a supplement has a recommended dose range, stay within that range. If a supplement has a precise

recommended dose, stay within 10% of that dose. Taking more than recommended could be

counterproductive or even dangerous. Taking less could render the supplement ineffective, yet starting with

half the regular dose could be prudent — especially if you know you tend to react strongly to supplements

or pharmaceuticals.

Q. At what time should I take my supplements?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Starting with half the regular dose can help

minimize the harm a supplement may cause when taken during the day (e.g., fatigue) or in the evening (e.g.,

insomnia).

Q. Should I take my supplements with or
without food?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Besides, a supplement’s digestion, absorption,

and metabolism can be affected differently by different foods. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), for

instance, are better absorbed with a small meal containing fat than with a large meal containing little to no

fat.

24

 
Q. What are DRI, RDA, AI, and UL?

The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) is a system of nutrition recommendations designed by the Institute of

Medicine (a US institution now known as the Health and Medicine Division). RDA, AI, and UL are part of this

system.

Contrary to what the name suggests, a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) doesn’t represent

an ideal amount; it represents the minimum you need in order to avoid deficiency-related health

issues. More precisely, it represents an amount just large enough to meet the minimum requirements

of 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages — which implies that the RDA is too low for

2.5% of healthy people.

The Adequate Intake (AI) is like the RDA, except that the number is more uncertain.

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the maximum safe amount. More precisely, it is the

maximum daily amount deemed to be safe for 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages —

which implies that the UL is too high for 2.5% of healthy people.

As a general rule, a healthy diet should include at least the RDA of each nutrient — but less than this

nutrient’s UL. This rule has many exceptions, though. For instance, people who sweat more need more salt

(i.e., sodium), whereas people who take metformin (a diabetes medicine) need more vitamin B12.

Moreover, the DRIs are based on the median weight of adults and children in the United States. Everything

else being equal (notably age, sex, and percentage of body fat), you likely need a lesser amount of

nutrients if you weigh less, and vice versa if you weigh more. The numbers, however, are not proportional

— if only because the brains of two people of very different weights have very similar needs. So you can’t

just double your RDIs for each nutrient if you weigh twice as much as the median adult of your age and sex

(even if we overlook that people weighing the same can differ in many respects, notably body fat).

Q. I’m a female and wish to increase my libido.
How does this influence the above
recommendations?

Human studies on libido and sexual satisfaction are mostly conducted on males, though maca has been

noted to also work on females. A lot more research is needed to determine how the other herbs mentioned

in this guide affect females.

If you try a libido booster, keep a journal of the effects you experience. Taking notes will help you

determine which supplements are effective and which are not.

Q. Isn’t soy protein bad for males?

Phytoestrogens are plant compounds structurally similar to estradiol, the main estrogen in males and

premenopausal females. Because soy contains isoflavones, a type of phytoestrogen, concern has been

raised about soy affecting male health.

To this day, two case reports have documented adverse effects (gynecomastia, hypogonadism, reduced

libido, and erectile dysfunction) from an estimated 360 mg of soy isoflavones per day for 6–12 months.

25

However, a meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials (RCTs, a much higher level of evidence than

case reports) found that males’ levels of total and free testosterone were not notably affected by either

60–240 mg of isoflavones or 10–70 grams of soy protein per day.

Accordingly, a couple of scoops of soy protein powder are unlikely to have estrogenic effects in males. If

you’d like to take more, however, look for a soy protein concentrate or isolate produced through the

alcohol-wash method, which dramatically lowers the isoflavone content.[52]

Keep in mind that the isoflavone content of different soy products can vary depending on several factors,

such as the variety of soybeans used, differences in growing and storage conditions, and differential food

processing techniques employed.[53] You can see how it varies below.

Isoflavone content of common soy foods

26

Reference: USDA FoodData Central Databases. Accessed Jan 18, 2019.

Q. Can alcohol influence my libido?

Yes. A little alcohol might decrease your inhibitions and thus increase your libido, but too much alcohol

acutely (drunkenness) or chronically (alcoholism) will lead to sexual disorders: loss of libido and less

intense orgasms in both males and females, plus some degree of erectile dysfunction and a probable

reduction in testosterone production in males.

Q. Can my diet influence my libido?

Yes, and in too many ways to count! To tackle the big issues, though, you should keep in mind that diets

very low in calories or fat are likely to lessen your libido over time.

Q. What causes erectile dysfunction

Erectile dysfunction (ED) affects 18% of all men over the age of 20 in the United States, with roughly 45%

of men over 20 and roughly 50% of all men aged 40–70 reporting at least some issues with erectile

function.[54] While increasing age is the biggest risk factor for ED, there are a host of other contributing

factors,[54] such as diabetes, vascular disease, low testosterone,[55] and hypothyroidism.[56]

Q. Will ejaculation decrease my testosterone
levels?

Ejaculation results in changes in prolactin (increase) and dopamine (temporary decrease) but does not

result in changes in testosterone.[57] Although prolactin and dopamine are both involved with testosterone,

they do not appear to influence testosterone levels acutely.

27

References

1.   Pfaus JG Pathways of sexual desire. J Sex Med. (2009 Jun)

2.   Rocco S Calabrò, Alberto Cacciola, Daniele Bruschetta, Demetrio Milardi, Fabrizio Quattrini, Francesca Sciarrone, Gianluca la
Rosa, Placido Bramanti, Giuseppe Anastasi Neuroanatomy and function of human sexual behavior: A neglected or unknown
issue?. Brain Behav. (2019 Dec)

3.   Agnes Higgins, Michael Nash, Aileen M Lynch Antidepressant-associated sexual dysfunction: impact, effects, and treatment.

Drug Healthc Patient Saf. (2010)

4.   Sandeep Grover, Surendra K Mattoo, Shreyas Pendharkar, Venkatesh Kandappan Sexual dysfunction in patients with alcohol

and opioid dependence. Indian J Psychol Med. (2014 Oct)

5.   Elizabeth Jing, Kristyn Straw-Wilson Sexual dysfunction in selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and potential

solutions: A narrative literature review. Ment Health Clin. (2016 Jun 29)

6.   Sharon J Parish, Steven R Hahn Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder: A Review of Epidemiology, Biopsychology, Diagnosis, and

Treatment. Sex Med Rev. (2016 Apr)

7.   Lori A Brotto The DSM diagnostic criteria for Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder in men. J Sex Med. (2010 Jun)

8.   J S Simons, M P Carey Prevalence of sexual dysfunctions: results from a decade of research. Arch Sex Behav. (2001 Apr)

9.   R C Rosen Prevalence and risk factors of sexual dysfunction in men and women. Curr Psychiatry Rep. (2000 Jun)

10.   Catherine B Johannes, Anita H Clayton, Dawn M Odom, Raymond C Rosen, Patricia A Russo, Jan L Shifren, Brigitta U Monz

Distressing sexual problems in United States women revisited: prevalence after accounting for depression. J Clin Psychiatry.
(2009 Dec)

11.   Anita H Clayton, Nancy N Maserejian, Megan K Connor, Liyuan Huang, Julia R Heiman, Raymond C Rosen Depression in
premenopausal women with HSDD: baseline findings from the HSDD Registry for Women. Psychosom Med. (2012 Apr)

12.   Terrence Sills, Glen Wunderlich, Robert Pyke, R Taylor Segraves, Sandra Leiblum, Anita Clayton, Dan Cotton, Kenneth Evans
The Sexual Interest and Desire Inventory-Female (SIDI-F): item response analyses of data from women diagnosed with
hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Sex Med. (2005 Nov)

13.   Nancy N Maserejian, Jan L Shifren, Sharon J Parish, Glenn D Braunstein, Eric P Gerstenberger, Raymond C Rosen The

presentation of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in premenopausal women. J Sex Med. (2010 Oct)

14.   Megan K Connor, Nancy N Maserejian, Leonard De Rogatis, Cindy M Meston, Eric P Gerstenberger, Raymond C Rosen Sexual
desire, distress, and associated factors in premenopausal women: preliminary findings from the hypoactive sexual desire
disorder registry for women. J Sex Marital Ther. (2011)

15.   Holly N Thomas, Megan Hamm, Rachel Hess, Sonya Borrero, Rebecca C Thurston "I want to feel like I used to feel": a

qualitative study of causes of low libido in postmenopausal women. Menopause. (2020 Mar)

16.   Rosemary Basson, Thea Gilks Women's sexual dysfunction associated with psychiatric disorders and their treatment. Womens

Health (Lond). (Jan-Dec 2018)

17.   Khurshid A Khurshid Comorbid Insomnia and Psychiatric Disorders: An Update. Innov Clin Neurosci. (2018 Apr 1)

18.   J Cartledge, S Minhas, I Eardley The role of nitric oxide in penile erection. Expert Opin Pharmacother. (2001 Jan)

19.   Biljana Musicki, Tongyun Liu, Gwen A Lagoda, Trinity J Bivalacqua, Travis D Strong, Arthur L Burnett Endothelial nitric oxide

synthase regulation in female genital tract structures. J Sex Med. (2009 Mar)

20.   V Dishy, G Sofowora, P A Harris, M Kandcer, F Zhan, A J Wood, C M Stein The effect of sildenafil on nitric oxide-mediated

vasodilation in healthy men. Clin Pharmacol Ther. (2001 Sep)

21.   Christoph A Schmitt, Verena M Dirsch Modulation of endothelial nitric oxide by plant-derived products. Nitric Oxide. (2009

Sep)

22.   Angela Castela, Pedro Vendeira, Carla Costa Testosterone, endothelial health, and erectile function. ISRN Endocrinol. (2011)

23.   Fui MN, Dupuis P, Grossmann M Lowered testosterone in male obesity: mechanisms, morbidity and management. Asian J

Androl. (2014 Mar-Apr)

24.   Gonzales GF, Córdova A, Vega K, Chung A, Villena A, Góñez C, Castillo S Effect of Lepidium meyenii (MACA) on sexual desire

and its absent relationship with serum testosterone levels in adult healthy men. Andrologia. (2002 Dec)

25.   Dording CM, Fisher L, Papakostas G, Farabaugh A, Sonawalla S, Fava M, Mischoulon D A double-blind, randomized, pilot dose-
finding study of maca root (L. meyenii) for the management of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction. CNS Neurosci Ther. (2008
Fall)

26.   Zenico T, Cicero AF, Valmorri L, Mercuriali M, Bercovich E Subjective effects of Lepidium meyenii (Maca) extract on well-being
and sexual performances in patients with mild erectile dysfunction: a randomised, double-blind clinical trial. Andrologia. (2009
Apr)

27.   Dording CM, Schettler PJ, Dalton ED, Parkin SR, Walker RS, Fehling KB, Fava M, Mischoulon D A double-blind placebo-

controlled trial of maca root as treatment for antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction in women. Evid Based Complement

28

Alternat Med. (2015)

28.   Gonzales-Arimborgo C, Yupanqui I, Montero E, Alarcón-Yaquetto DE, Zevallos-Concha A, Caballero L, Gasco M, Zhao J, Khan
IA, Gonzales GF Acceptability, Safety, and Efficacy of Oral Administration of Extracts of Black or Red Maca (Lepidium meyenii)
in Adult Human Subjects: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). (2016 Aug 18)

29.   Abstracts of the Joint Meeting of the European (ESSM) and International (ISSM) Societies for Sexual Medicine. Brussels,

Belgium. December 7-11, 2008.. J Sex Med. (2009-Jan)

30.   Hye Chang Rhim, Min Seo Kim, Young-Jin Park, Woo Suk Choi, Hyoung Keun Park, Hyeong Gon Kim, Aram Kim, Sung Hyun

Paick The Potential Role of Arginine Supplements on Erectile Dysfunction: A Systemic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Sex Med.
(2019 Feb)

31.   Stief TW, Weippert M, Kretschmer V, Renz H Arginine inhibits hemostasis activation. Thromb Res. (2001 Nov 15)

32.   Rosen RC, Riley A, Wagner G, Osterloh IH, Kirkpatrick J, Mishra A The international index of erectile function (IIEF): a

multidimensional scale for assessment of erectile dysfunction. Urology. (1997 Jun)

33.   M M Berner, L Kriston, A Harms Efficacy of PDE-5-inhibitors for erectile dysfunction. A comparative meta-analysis of fixed-
dose regimen randomized controlled trials administering the International Index of Erectile Function in broad-spectrum
populations. Int J Impot Res. (May-Jun 2006)

34.   Howard A Fink, Roderick Mac Donald, Indulis R Rutks, David B Nelson, Timothy J Wilt Sildenafil for male erectile dysfunction: a

systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med. (2002 Jun 24)

35.   Dean RC, Lue TF Physiology of penile erection and pathophysiology of erectile dysfunction. Urol Clin North Am. (2005 Nov)

36.   Maggi M, Filippi S, Ledda F, Magini A, Forti G Erectile dysfunction: from biochemical pharmacology to advances in medical

therapy. Eur J Endocrinol. (2000 Aug)

37.   Ückert S, Kuczyk MA, Oelke M Phosphodiesterase inhibitors in clinical urology. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. (2013 May)

38.   Friedman JM, Friedman AJ Development and therapeutic applications of nitric oxide-releasing materials. Future Sci OA. (2015

Aug 1)

39.   Hossein A Ghofrani, Joanna Pepke-Zaba, Joan A Barbera, Richard Channick, Anne M Keogh, Miguel A Gomez-Sanchez,
Meinhard Kneussl, Friedrich Grimminger Nitric oxide pathway and phosphodiesterase inhibitors in pulmonary arterial
hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. (2004 Jun 16)

40.   Zanoli P, Zavatti M, Montanari C, Baraldi M Influence of Eurycoma longifolia on the copulatory activity of sexually sluggish and

impotent male rats. J Ethnopharmacol. (2009 Nov 12)

41.   Ismail SB, Wan Mohammad WM, George A, Nik Hussain NH, Musthapa Kamal ZM, Liske E Randomized Clinical Trial on the Use
of PHYSTA Freeze-Dried Water Extract of Eurycoma longifolia for the Improvement of Quality of Life and Sexual Well-Being in
Men. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. (2012)

42.   Steels E, Rao A, Vitetta L Physiological Aspects of Male Libido Enhanced by Standardized Trigonella foenum-graecum Extract

and Mineral Formulation. Phytother Res. (2011 Feb 10)

43.   Wilborn C, Taylor L, Poole C, Foster C, Willoughby D, Kreider R Effects of a purported aromatase and 5α-reductase inhibitor on

hormone profiles in college-age men. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. (2010 Dec)

44.   Poole C, Bushey B, Foster C, Campbell B, Willoughby D, Kreider R, Taylor L, Wilborn C The effects of a commercially available

botanical supplement on strength, body composition, power output, and hormonal profiles in resistance-trained males. J Int Soc
Sports Nutr. (2010 Oct 27)

45.   Neychev VK, Mitev VI The aphrodisiac herb Tribulus terrestris does not influence the androgen production in young men. J

Ethnopharmacol. (2005 Oct 3)

46.   Gilbert DG, Hagen RL, D'Agostino JA The effects of cigarette smoking on human sexual potency. Addict Behav. (1986)

47.   Harte CB, Meston CM Acute effects of nicotine on physiological and subjective sexual arousal in nonsmoking men: a

randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Sex Med. (2008 Jan)

48.   Harte CB, Meston CM The inhibitory effects of nicotine on physiological sexual arousal in nonsmoking women: results from a

randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial. J Sex Med. (2008 May)

49.   J Peugh, S Belenko Alcohol, drugs and sexual function: a review. J Psychoactive Drugs. (Jul-Sep 2001)

50.   Mark G Biebel, Arthur L Burnett, Hossein Sadeghi-Nejad Male Sexual Function and Smoking. Sex Med Rev. (2016 Oct)

51.   G Corona, A Sansone, F Pallotti, A Ferlin, R Pivonello, A M Isidori, M Maggi, E A Jannini People smoke for nicotine, but lose

sexual and reproductive health for tar: a narrative review on the effect of cigarette smoking on male sexuality and
reproduction. J Endocrinol Invest. (2020 Apr 22)

52.   Anderson RL, Wolf WJ Compositional changes in trypsin inhibitors, phytic acid, saponins and isoflavones related to soybean

processing. J Nutr. (1995 Mar)

53.   Erdman JW Jr, Badger TM, Lampe JW, Setchell KD, Messina M Not all soy products are created equal: caution needed in

interpretation of research results. J Nutr. (2004 May)

54.   Selvin E, Burnett AL, Platz EA Prevalence and risk factors for erectile dysfunction in the US. Am J Med. (2007 Feb)

55.   Rastrelli G, Corona G, Maggi M Testosterone and sexual function in men. Maturitas. (2018 Jun)

29

56.   Chen D, Yan Y, Huang H, Dong Q, Tian H The association between subclinical hypothyroidism and erectile dysfunction. Pak J

Med Sci. (2018 May-Jun)

57.   M S Exton, T H Krüger, N Bursch, P Haake, W Knapp, M Schedlowski, U Hartmann Endocrine response to masturbation-

induced orgasm in healthy men following a 3-week sexual abstinence. World J Urol. (2001 Nov)

30

