Liver Health Supplement Guide

Written By: Michael Hull, & Wyatt Brown

Edited By: Pierre-Alexandre Sicart

Reviewed By: Kamal Patel

Table of Contents

Introduction

Combos

Primary Supplements

Secondary Supplements

Promising Supplements

Unproven Supplements

Inadvisable Supplements

FAQ

2

Introduction

The liver participates in so many vital processes that its nickname should be the Swiss Army organ. It

doesn’t receive as much attention as other organs, because cardiovascular disease, cancer, and various

other diseases are more likely causes of death than liver disease, but if the liver isn’t functioning well, the

effects can be felt throughout the body.

Perhaps a more specific analogy for the liver would be a factory: it is responsible for the production,

breakdown, transport, and storage of a wide variety of chemicals, acting as the central hub for many of the

components of metabolism.

Liver function basics

So what specifically does the liver do?

First, it continuously takes a large amount of blood glucose (i.e., blood sugar) from the bloodstream, stores

it as glycogen, and then converts it back to glucose, releasing it as needed. If the body needs more glucose

and the liver is low on glycogen, it turns individual amino acids into glucose in a process called

gluconeogenesis. Additionally, because glucose is the body’s main monosaccharide, other ones — namely,

fructose and galactose — are converted to glucose, and this happens primarily in the liver.[1]

3

Depiction of glycogen

When food intake provides an excess of energy, the liver converts more carbohydrates into fatty acids,

takes fatty acids from the bloodstream, and either uses them, stores them, or packages them to be

circulated once again. Under conditions of starvation or very low intake of carbohydrates, it’s the liver that

creates ketone bodies from fatty acids.

Besides its role in the metabolism of the body’s main energy sources, the number of important molecules

that the liver synthesizes is too long to list, but it includes albumin, cholesterol, uric acid, bile acids, growth

factors, and proteins involved in the inflammatory response, among many others.[2]

The liver is also pivotal for the detoxification of xenobiotics (substances foreign to the body) and

transforming them into more benign and excretable forms.[3] These include pharmaceutical drugs,

environmental toxins, alcohol, bacterial by-products, and more — things you definitely don’t want building

up in your system.

There is widespread misunderstanding about detoxification in the body. Products, protocols, and diets

claim to remove toxins from the body with no real evidence or understanding of how detoxification works.

On the other hand, some of the backlash to detoxing makes it sound like all you need are a functioning liver

and kidneys to deal with toxins optimally. However, nutrients are needed to support optimal functioning of

4

the liver and its detoxification enzymes. This makes some “detox” supplements plausible, but they usually

lack rigorous research.[4]

Anyone who looks into the nutritional information of liver will immediately notice something: it stores huge

amounts of vitamin A, copper, and vitamin B12.[5][6][7] These, along with many other nutrients and compounds,

are stored in the liver and released as needed. So with the liver storing, transporting, detoxifying, and

synthesizing so many things, it’s clear that it’s intimately linked to the rest of the body, and a healthy liver is

essential to overall health.

When liver function goes wrong

There are numerous diseases that can affect the liver, but many of them are beyond the scope of this

guide; here, we’re focused mainly on those that are influenced by diet and lifestyle and are particularly

common: nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and more advanced manifestations, such as nonalcoholic

steatohepatitis (NASH) and cirrhosis. NAFLD is estimated to affect roughly 25% of adults in the US and

Europe, making it especially worth our attention.[8]

Fatty liver disease

Fatty liver disease is generally defined by steatosis, an accumulation of excess fat in the liver; lesions, such

as fibrosis, where connective tissue replaces normal tissue; ballooning; excessive accumulation of various

compounds; and inflammation, causing permanent scarring and cirrhosis when damage has progressed

enough that the liver loses function.[9]

5

Progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)

When a major cause of this is excessive alcohol consumption, it’s called alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD),

and when alcohol abuse isn’t present, it’s nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). While they share some

similarities, they are not the same condition. AFLD tends to be more severe and have more diverse

pathological features.[10]

NAFLD often goes hand in hand with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Likely causes include

overeating and subsequent obesity; lack of physical activity; smoking; and the metabolic impairments and

inflammation that follow. What’s worse, because the liver is so important to the metabolic health of the

body, its impairment is likely to start a vicious cycle where worse liver function leads to worse metabolic

function and vice versa.[11]

6

Fatty liver and diabetes

Many molecular mechanisms are involved in the vicious circle linking fatty liver to diabetes and diabetes to

progressive liver injury.

On the left portion of the below image is the first part of the journey, leading from initial insulin resistance

to fatty liver and eventually to the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D) in those predisposed individuals

in whom pancreatic lipotoxicity occurs.

On the right is the mechanism which – triggered by long-lasting/decompensated T2D – may be conducive

to progressive liver disease including primary liver cancer in predisposed individuals.

The vicious circle of fatty liver and diabetes

Adapted from Loria et al. Hepatol Res. 2013.[11] 

HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; IL, interleukin; NASH, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; T2D,

type 2 diabetes.

Assessing liver health

The most common way to assess liver injury is through liver enzyme tests, mainly alanine aminotransferase

(ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT), and a

handful of others. These enzymes participate in the metabolism of amino acids, among other functions, and

tend to be elevated in the bloodstream when liver cells are injured.[12] However, they can be present in the

muscles and other organs, be elevated in other diseases, and sometimes rise due to factors other than liver

7

damage.

ALT is more prevalent in the liver than AST, and adding in GGT and other markers can help paint a clearer

picture. There are newer biomarkers based on mitochondrial damage, cell death, DNA damage,

inflammation, and more, but the vast majority of liver damage in short-term trials continues to be evaluated

mainly by the aminotransferase tests. When it comes to fatty liver disease and its progression, ultrasound

and biopsies that measure the amount of steatosis, fibrosis, and other markers are commonly used, and

researchers have come up with grading schemes based on them.[13][14]

Other ways to measure liver health include approximating its function by using markers that would be

altered if the liver weren’t performing its functions properly. Common tests that do this are bilirubin,

albumin, ceruloplasmin, and the ability to produce blood-clotting factors. Various other tests are being

added all the time.[15][16]

Liver health: where supplements fit in

In this guide, we have assembled a list of several promising supplements for the general defense of the

liver. Their mechanisms differ, but a common theme is increasing the levels of endogenous antioxidants the

body produces and regulating inflammation to protect the liver when it’s under stress from toxins,

pollutants, infection, and metabolic dysfunction.

Beyond what we have included in this guide, the lifestyle modifications generally associated with metabolic

and cardiovascular health apply to the liver as well: weight loss, a highly nutritious diet, and exercise can be

considered the basis of liver health, with supplements potentially adding an extra boost.[17]

Wyatt Brown, Researcher

8

Combos

Core Combo

Take 400 mg of SAMe thrice a day (i.e., 1,200 mg/day), with or without food.

If you have an MTHFR gene mutation, replace the SAMe by 7.5–15 mg of L-methylfolate once a day and

1,500–2,000 mg of TMG twice or thrice a day (i.e., 3–6 g/day). TMG can be consumed as a powder or

simply through foods, notably wheat bran (1,339 mg of TMG per 100 g), spinach (600–645 mg of TMG per

100 g), and beetroot (114–297 mg of TMG per 100 g).

Getting enough trimethylglycine through foods

9

 Tip: Try one combo alone for a few weeks

Taking too many supplements at once may prevent you from determining which ones are truly

working. Start with just one of the combos suggested here for a couple of weeks before you

consider making any modification, such as adding another supplement, altering a supplements

dosage, or incorporating the supplements from an additional combo.

When adding another supplement to your regimen, be methodical. For example, you may wish to

take all the supplements from two combos. Select the combo that you wish to try first and take this

for a couple of weeks. Then, add one supplement from the second combo and wait another week to

see how it affects you. Continue this process until you’ve added all the supplements you wish to.

If a supplement appears in two combos you wish to combine, don’t stack the doses; instead,

combine the ranges. For instance, if the range is 2–4 mg in one combo and 3–6 mg in the other, your

new range becomes 2–6 mg. Always start with the lower end of the range — especially in this case,

since the reason why one of the ranges has a lower ceiling in one combo may be due to a synergy

with another supplement in the same combo. Reading through the full supplement entry may help

you decide which dose to aim for, but if you’re not sure, lower is usually safer.

Specialized Combos

For people with a fatty liver

Take 4.5–8 g of spirulina per day, with or without food. Additionally, drink 1–4 cups (1 cup = 177–237 mL /

6–8 oz) per day of regular, half-caffeinated, or decaffeinated coffee.

For people with hepatitis C

Take 1.5–8 g of spirulina per day, with or without food. Additionally, drink 1–4 cups (1 cup = 177–237 mL /

6–8 oz) per day of regular, half-caffeinated, or decaffeinated coffee. Before bed, take TUDCA (500–1,750

mg) without food.

For people with cholesterol-rich non-calcified
gallstones in their liver

Take 500–1,750 mg of TUDCA before bed, without food.

For people who regularly drink or take
acetaminophen

10

The following protocols can help your liver process reasonable amounts of alcohol or acetaminophen, but

they won’t save you in case of abuse of either substance.

Twice a day, take 140 mg of silymarin (i.e., 280 mg/day) and 400 mg of NAC (i.e., 800 mg/day).

Silymarin may reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives. If you take or might take an oral contraceptive,

replace the above protocol by this one:

Thrice a day, take 4 mg of picroliv per kilogram of body weight (i.e., 12 mg/kg/day) and 400 mg of NAC

(i.e., 1,200 mg/day).

If you are prone to nausea, take your NAC with food.

11

Primary Supplements

S-Adenosyl-Methionine (SAMe)

What makes SAMe a primary supplement

S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) works with enzymes in a process called methylation: when a molecule in

your body needs a methyl group in order to undergo a chemical reaction, SAMe provides that group.

Since SAMe synthesis decreases with chronic liver disease, oral SAMe can benefit the person afflicted, but

it doesn’t follow that SAMe affects the disease itself. Current evidence suggests, however, that oral SAMe

can support normal liver functions and may help fight cholestasis, alcoholic liver disease, and possibly even

nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is an enzyme that helps process amino acids. If you have an

MTHFR gene mutation, SAMe can still benefit your liver, but it may also cause a “backlog” of a potentially

harmful metabolite known as homocysteine — a biomarker of cardiovascular disease. In this scenario, it

would be safer to replace SAMe by L-methylfolate (aka levomefolic acid, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, and 5-

MTHF), a form of vitamin B9 (folic acid).

Preliminary evidence suggests that ingesting choline or its derivative trimethylglycine (TMG, aka betaine)

can raise SAMe levels, though to a lesser extent than ingesting SAMe. Unlike choline, TMG also has

preliminary evidence for benefiting the liver. Both choline and TMG lower homocysteine levels in normal

people, which makes them less likely than SAMe to raise homocysteine levels in people with an MTHFR

gene mutation.

How to take SAMe

First choice is SAMe; second, TMG; third, choline. If you have an MTHFR gene mutation, however, do not

take SAMe; instead, take L-methylfolate, with or without TMG or choline.

Take 400 mg of SAMe thrice a day (i.e., 1,200 mg/day), with or without food.

Take 1.5–2 g of trimethylglycine (TMG) twice or thrice a day (i.e., 3–6 g/day). TMG can be consumed as a

powder or simply through foods, notably wheat bran (1,339 mg of TMG per 100 g), spinach (600–645 mg

of TMG per 100 g), and beetroot (114–297 mg of TMG per 100 g).

Most people get enough choline through their diet. Track what you eat for a week; if, on average, you are

getting less than 80% of your Adequate Intake (AI), try eating more foods rich in choline before you

consider taking 250–500 mg of choline bitartrate once a day with food.

Take 7.5–15 mg of L-methylfolate once a day.

Adequate Intake (AI) for choline (mg)

AGE

MALE

FEMALE

PREGNANT

LACTATING

12

 
AGE

MALE

FEMALE

PREGNANT

LACTATING

0–6 months

7–12 months

1–3 years

4–8 years

9–13 years

14–18 years

>18 years

125

150

200

250

375

550

550

125

150

200

250

375

400

425

—

—

—

—

—

450

450

—

—

—

—

—

550

550

Reference: Institute of Medicine. Choline (chapter 12 in Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6,

Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. The National Academies Press. 1998.)[18]

 Tip: Why don’t you recommend brands or specific products?

For two reasons:

We don’t test physical products. What our researchers do — all day, every day — is analyze

peer-reviewed studies on supplements and nutrition.

We go to great lengths to protect our integrity. As you’ve probably noticed, we don’t sell

supplements, or even show ads from supplement companies, even though either option

would generate a lot more money than our Supplement Guides ever will — and for a lot less

work, too.

If we recommended any brands or specific products, our integrity would be called into question, so

… we can’t do it. That being said, in the interest of keeping you safe, we drew a short list of steps

you should take if a product has caught your interest.

13

Secondary Supplements

Milk Thistle

What makes milk thistle a secondary option

Milk thistle (Silybum marianum) has been used to protect the liver as far back as ancient Greece.

Nowadays, limited evidence suggests that silymarin, its bioactive compound, can increase the synthesis

rates of protein and DNA in the liver. In the presence of liver toxins, it can also act as an anti-inflammatory

agent. People who are not using compounds that may harm the liver (e.g., alcohol or some medications) are

not likely to benefit from milk thistle.

High doses of silymarin (420–600 mg) have shown efficacy against death cap mushroom poisoning

(Amanita phalloides); for obvious reasons, however, there have been no controlled trials to confirm the

conclusions from the case studies. If you ever get death cap poisoning, by all means take some silymarin …

after you’ve called emergency services, or on your way to the hospital!

Silymarin may lower the effectiveness of oral contraceptives.

14

 
Milk thistle vs. the death cap

How to take milk thistle

Take 140 mg of silymarin twice a day (i.e., 280 mg/day), with or without food. This translates to 187.5 mg

twice a day (i.e., 375 mg/day) of a milk thistle extract standardized to 80% silymarin.

N-Acetylcysteine (NAC)

What makes NAC a secondary option

N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can increase the body’s production of the antioxidant glutathione. Low levels of

15

 
glutathione are associated with various inflammatory and oxidative diseases, such as nonalcoholic fatty

liver disease (NAFLD).

High NAC doses are used acutely in cases of toxin-induced liver damage, particularly when caused by an

overdose of acetaminophen (aka paracetamol). The most common oral protocol in US hospitals is based on

the weight of the patient in kilograms: one 140 mg/kg dose followed by sixteen 70 mg/kg doses 4 hours

apart. Such high doses have been known to cause nausea and vomiting, but much lower doses can be

taken daily to support glutathione levels and thus, indirectly, the liver.

How to take NAC

Take 400 mg of NAC once to thrice a day (i.e., 400–1,200 mg/day total). If you are prone to nausea, take

your NAC with food.

Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid (TUDCA)

What makes TUDCA a secondary option

Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) is a water-soluble, taurine-conjugated bile acid. It exists in trace

amounts in the human body, where it helps regulate apoptosis (i.e., programmed cell death).

In hospitals, TUDCA is used to treat cholestasis, an impairment of the flow of bile (a digestive fluid secreted

by the liver). It has also been shown to benefit people suffering from hepatitis C or from primary biliary

cirrhosis, two diseases that damage bile ducts, but studies on other liver diseases, such as alcoholic fatty

liver disease (AFLD) or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), are still lacking.

TUDCA supplementation can help prevent endoplasmic reticulum stress in your cells and the resulting

inflammation and oxidative stress, but more evidence is needed to determine if this property translates to a

protective effect on the liver.

On the other hand, there is already significant evidence that TUDCA supplementation can induce

cholesterol efflux and thus regulate cholesterol levels in cells. Combined with a low-cholesterol diet,

TUDCA can reduce the risk of gallstone formation and even dissolve cholesterol-rich non-calcified

gallstones. It cannot, however, dissolve gallstones rich in bilirubin or in calcium and other minerals.

One study in people with obesity reported that TUDCA supplementation increased insulin sensitivity in

muscle and liver cells, but these results have not been replicated.

How to take TUDCA

Take 500–1,750 mg of TUDCA before bed, without food.

16

 
Promising Supplements

Coffee

What makes coffee a promising option

Coffee is a wildly popular drink worldwide that may also have some health benefits for the liver. This

caffeinated beverage contains a mix of anti-inflammatory and bioactive antioxidant compounds that are

thought to be responsible for these benefits.[19][20][21]

Numerous prospective observational studies, a handful of case–control studies, and one RCT have seen

people who consume coffee regularly to have decreased odds for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD),

liver fibrosis, liver cirrhosis, complications from chronic hepatitis C, and liver cancer compared to those

who drink coffee infrequently or not at all.[22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33] Additional associations have been seen

between coffee consumption and improvement in liver enzyme profiles (ALT, AST, and GGT).[34]

You can experience caffeine dependence when you become tolerant to some of its effects. When tolerance

occurs, and you stop consuming caffeine, you can experience symptoms of withdrawal, such as fatigue,

irritability, headaches, and — ironically — sleeplessness.

Caffeine also interacts dangerously with several pharmaceuticals, notably tizanidine and a type of

antidepressant called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). It can also interfere with glucose metabolism,

raise blood pressure, raise heart rate, and increase urination (though the effect is usually mild), but those

four effects fade away as your tolerance to caffeine develops.

Caffeine can also decrease blood lithium levels. Suddenly eliminating all caffeine from your diet may cause

your lithium levels to rise. If you are on lithium medication, keep your day-to-day caffeine intake roughly

the same.[35] If you wish to stop taking caffeine, talk with your physician about slowly weaning yourself from

it.

You might already be consuming more caffeine than you think. When you calculate your daily intake,

consider all your beverages, foods, and supplements (pre-workouts and energy boosters, particularly). Bear

in mind that caffeine can be “hidden” in a product — for instance, if you read “guarana seeds” on a label,

remember that those are richer in caffeine than coffee seeds.

17

 
Caffeine content of popular drinks

References: McCusker et al. J Anal Toxicol. 2006.[36] ● Desbrow et al. Nutr Health. 2019.[37] ● Ludwig et al. Food Funct. 2014.[38]

● Fox et al. J Agric Food Chem. 2013.[39] ● McCusker et al. J Anal Toxicol. 2003.[40] ● Angeloni et al. Food Res Int. 2019.[41]

How to take coffee

Drink 1–4 cups a day of regular, half-caffeinated (half-caf), or decaffeinated coffee (decaf).The definition of

what a “cup” of coffee constitutes varies from study to study. Generally speaking, one cup is 177–237 mL

(6–8 oz) so your total daily intake should be between 177–946 mL (6–32 oz).

The liver benefits of coffee appear to be additive, with 1–2 cups providing better outcomes than <1, and 3–

18

4 cups outperforming 1–2. More than 4 cups a day may also provide additional benefits but, should you

choose to consume >4 cups/day, be mindful of your overall caffeine intake.[33] After your 4th cup of

caffeinated coffee, switching to decaf is advisable to keep your daily caffeine intake at safe levels.

Removing caffeine from coffee changes its composition little.[42] Yet, caffeine itself may play a role in

coffee’s beneficial liver effects.[43][20][44] It is plausible that decaffeinated coffee might have less potent

effects on liver health, but this hypothesis does not have much research looking into it.[31]

If you consume caffeinated coffee, monitor your overall caffeine intake to ensure you’re not consuming

unsafe levels.

For healthy adults, caffeine intakes up to 400 mg/day don’t raise any general health concerns.[45][46][47]

While you can consume more, 400 mg is how much caffeine most healthy people can regularly

consume in a day without suffering lasting harm.

If you are pregnant or breastfeeding, the scientific evidence differs on what constitutes a safe

upper intake: either 200 or 300 mg of caffeine per day.[45][47][48][49][50] The clinical evidence being

scarce, it is advisable to keep consumption on the lower side of these recommendations.

If you have cardiovascular health concerns, the long-term implications of regular caffeine intake are

less clear — low to moderate intakes could be safe, but consult your physician first.[48][51]

Caffeine can disrupt sleep when consumed in the evening, or even in the afternoon; even if it does not

prevent you from falling asleep, caffeine will impair the quality of your sleep. In healthy adults, the average

half-life of caffeine falls between 5 and 6 hours, but this number can vary greatly between individuals, from

1.5 to 9.5 hours, because of genetics and other factors — heavy smoking can double the rate of caffeine

metabolism, pregnancy can halve it,[52] etc.[53]

19

 
 Digging Deeper: What is “half-life”

In its simplest definition, half-life is the time it takes for a compound to reach half of its initial

concentration in the blood. For example, say you consume one cup of coffee that contains 200

milligrams of caffeine. In 5–6 hours, the caffeine concentration in your blood should drop to 100

milligrams, on average.

Below is an example of a half-life elimination curve. For the hypothetical compound being measured,

it has a half-life elimination rate of 1 hour. This means that for every hour that goes by its

concentration in the bloodstream is reduced by 50%.

Half-life elimination curve

Adapted from: Hallare et al. StatPearls. 2020.[54]

Picrorhiza Kurroa

What makes Picrorhiza kurroa a promising
option

20

 
In Ayurvedic medicine, _Picrorhiza kurroa _is a liver tonic. Picroliv, its bioactive compound, is composed of

picroside I and picroside II.

Picrorhiza kurroa has antioxidant properties, can improve the flow of bile (a digestive fluid secreted by the

liver), and might reduce fat accumulation in the liver. In animal studies, it was more effective than milk

thistle at protecting the liver against all kinds of toxins, including death cap mushroom (Amanita

phalloides). Milk thistle, however, is backed by more human studies.

Picrorhiza kurroa is an endangered plant. Should you decide to take it, seek out a company that focuses on

plant sustainability.

How to take Picrorhiza kurroa

Choose a Picrorhiza kurroa extract standardized for its picroliv content. Take 12 mg of picroliv per

kilogram of bodyweight per day (5.4 mg/lb/day) in three divided doses, with or without food.

Daily Picrorhiza kurroa intake by bodyweight

POUNDS

KILOGRAMS

PER DOSE (mg)

TOTAL INTAKE (mg)

100

125

150

175

200

225

250

275

45

57

68

79

91

102

113

125

Spirulina

180

230

270

315

365

400

450

500

540

685

815

950

1,090

1,225

1,355

1,500

What makes spirulina a promising option

Spirulina, a protein-rich blue-green algae, has been shown to reduce inflammation and oxidative stress.

Moreover, one of its bioactive compounds, c-phycocyanin, is a bile acid mimetic, which is why spirulina

supplementation is thought to mimic Gilbert’s Syndrome, a medical condition characterized by high levels

of bile acids in the body. Elevated bile acid levels are associated with a reduced risk of obesity, diabetes,

and cardiovascular complications. People with Gilbert's Syndrome tend to have longer lifespans.

Preliminary evidence suggests that spirulina might help treat hepatitis C and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease

(NAFLD).

21

 
Spirulina vs. _non-alcoholic fatty liver disease_ (NAFLD)

Reference: Ferreira-Hermosillo et al. J Med Case Rep. 2010.[55]

How to take spirulina

Take 1.5–8 g of spirulina per day, with or without food. Spirulina is available as bulk powder, as powder in

capsules, and in tablet form.

22

Unproven Supplements

Of the supplements we have reviewed, none currently fit the above description.

23

Inadvisable Supplements

Alcohol

The amount of alcohol to consume for optimal liver health is likely close to none (or in more translatable

terms, drinking very infrequently). Yet, many people enjoy having a drink, so it's important to understand

how to do so in a way that minimizes potentially harmful effects.

There are two important factors to consider when it comes to alcohol intake: amount and time.

1.  A moderate drinking amount is considered up to 1 drink per day for females and up to 2 drinks per

day for males. For reference, 1 drink is typically 355 mL (12 oz) of 5% alcohol beer, 150 mL (5 oz)

of 12.5% wine, or 45 mL (1.5 oz) of drinks with a higher (≥30%) alcohol content.

2.  Spreading your alcohol intake over a longer period of time will be less taxing to your liver.

Consuming 2 drinks in under 30 minutes will be more harmful compared to consuming the same

amount over an hour or two.

As a general rule of thumb, if you wake up with a hangover you’ve almost certainly drank too much alcohol.

24

FAQ

Q. What about the supplements not covered in
this guide?

Our guides are regularly updated, often with new supplements. We prioritize assessing (and reassessing)

the most popular of them and those most likely to work. However, if there is a specific supplement you’d

like to see covered in a future update, please let us know by filling out this survey.

Q. Can I add a supplement not covered in this
guide to my combo?

Supplement with your current combo for a few weeks before attempting any change. Talk to your physician

and research each potential addition. Check for known negative interactions with other supplements and

pharmaceuticals in your current combo, but also for synergies. If two supplements are synergistic or

additive in their effects, you might want to use lower doses of each.

Q. Can I modify the recommended doses?

If a supplement has a recommended dose range, stay within that range. If a supplement has a precise

recommended dose, stay within 10% of that dose. Taking more than recommended could be

counterproductive or even dangerous. Taking less could render the supplement ineffective, yet starting with

half the regular dose could be prudent — especially if you know you tend to react strongly to supplements

or pharmaceuticals.

Q. At what time should I take my supplements?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Starting with half the regular dose can help

minimize the harm a supplement may cause when taken during the day (e.g., fatigue) or in the evening (e.g.,

insomnia).

Q. Should I take my supplements with or
without food?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Besides, a supplement’s digestion, absorption,

and metabolism can be affected differently by different foods. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), for

instance, are better absorbed with a small meal containing fat than with a large meal containing little to no

fat.

25

 
Q. What are DRI, RDA, AI, and UL?

The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) is a system of nutrition recommendations designed by the Institute of

Medicine (a US institution now known as the Health and Medicine Division). RDA, AI, and UL are part of this

system.

Contrary to what the name suggests, a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) doesn’t represent

an ideal amount; it represents the minimum you need in order to avoid deficiency-related health

issues. More precisely, it represents an amount just large enough to meet the minimum requirements

of 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages — which implies that the RDA is too low for

2.5% of healthy people.

The Adequate Intake (AI) is like the RDA, except that the number is more uncertain.

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the maximum safe amount. More precisely, it is the

maximum daily amount deemed to be safe for 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages —

which implies that the UL is too high for 2.5% of healthy people.

As a general rule, a healthy diet should include at least the RDA of each nutrient — but less than this

nutrient’s UL. This rule has many exceptions, though. For instance, people who sweat more need more salt

(i.e., sodium), whereas people who take metformin (a diabetes medicine) need more vitamin B12.

Moreover, the DRIs are based on the median weight of adults and children in the United States. Everything

else being equal (notably age, sex, and percentage of body fat), you likely need a lesser amount of

nutrients if you weigh less, and vice versa if you weigh more. The numbers, however, are not proportional

— if only because the brains of two people of very different weights have very similar needs. So you can’t

just double your RDIs for each nutrient if you weigh twice as much as the median adult of your age and sex

(even if we overlook that people weighing the same can differ in many respects, notably body fat).

Q. Why take NAC to make glutathione? Why not
take glutathione directly?

Oral glutathione gets digested into its constituent amino acids: cysteine, glycine, and glutamic acid. Of

those three, cysteine is the rate-limiting factor in endogenous glutathione production. Oral N-Acetylcysteine

(NAC) is simply a more efficient (and cheaper) way of providing your body with cysteine. Multiple studies

have reported greater increases in circulating glutathione from oral NAC than from (an equal dose of) oral

glutathione.

Q. I don’t have any liver problems, can I still
supplement for general liver health?

A supplement will not make a liver that is neither damaged nor diseased “even healthier”. If you are into

preventive supplementation, just take this guide’s core supplement (SAMe).

Q. A lot of spirulina is farm-grown and

26

harvested. How do I know it is safe?

Spirulina is considered a food grade product and is generally rigorously tested. For example, it undergoes

microbiological and chemical composition tests as well as tests for contaminants like heavy metals,

pesticides, and extraneous materials.

That being said, here’s a list of steps you can take to find a high quality spirulina supplement.

Q. What are some of the dietary
recommendations for people with NAFLD?

Since there are no approved medicines to treat nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), lifestyle and

dietary recommendations are the staple.[56] Recommendations include:[57]

Reducing bodyweight by 7–10%

Reducing saturated fat to less than 7% of total calories

Minimizing trans fat intake

Minimizing sugar intake

Maintaining cholesterol intake below 200 milligrams per day

Keeping fat intake to 25–35% of caloric intake

A simpler guideline is to follow a Mediterranean-type diet with emphasis on legumes, fruits, vegetables, fish,

nuts, whole grains, with or without caloric restriction.[58]

Q. What about detox diets and cleanses?

Despite their popularity, “detox diets” are not backed by the evidence, nor are they even based on

scientifically sound principles.

While your body can accumulate toxicants, detox diets aren’t supported by toxicological mechanisms or

trial evidence, and they can occasionally be dangerous. Your liver, lungs, kidneys, and other organs work

nonstop to “detoxify” you; a diet rich in protein, vegetables, and fruits will provide them with the nutrients

they need to properly function.

27

References

1.   Liangyou Rui Energy metabolism in the liver. Compr Physiol. (2014 Jan)

2.   Elijah Trefts, Maureen Gannon, David H Wasserman The liver. Curr Biol. (2017 Nov 6)

3.   Grant DM Detoxification pathways in the liver. J Inherit Metab Dis. (1991)

4.   Hodges RE, Minich DM Modulation of Metabolic Detoxification Pathways Using Foods and Food-Derived Components: A

Scientific Review with Clinical Application. J Nutr Metab. (2015)

5.   William S Blaner, Yang Li, Pierre-Jacques Brun, Jason J Yuen, Seung-Ah Lee, Robin D Clugston Vitamin A Absorption, Storage

and Mobilization. Subcell Biochem. (2016)

6.   Eve A Roberts, Bibudhendra Sarkar Liver as a key organ in the supply, storage, and excretion of copper. Am J Clin Nutr. (2008

Sep)

7.   Kodicek E. Storage of Vitamins in Liver. Proc Nutr Soc. (1954 SEP)

8.   Stefano Bellentani The epidemiology of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Liver Int. (2017 Jan)

9.   Matthew M Yeh, Elizabeth M Brunt Pathological features of fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology. (2014 Oct)

10.   Mark Benedict, Xuchen Zhang Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: An expanded review. World J Hepatol. (2017 Jun 8)

11.   Paola Loria, Amedeo Lonardo, Frank Anania Liver and diabetes. A vicious circle. Hepatol Res. (2013 Jan)

12.   Mitchell R McGill The past and present of serum aminotransferases and the future of liver injury biomarkers. EXCLI J. (2016 Dec

15)

13.   Pierre Bedossa, Christine Poitou, Nicolas Veyrie, Jean-Luc Bouillot, Arnaud Basdevant, Valerie Paradis, Joan Tordjman, Karine
Clement Histopathological algorithm and scoring system for evaluation of liver lesions in morbidly obese patients. Hepatology.
(2012 Nov)

14.   Alastair D Burt, Carolin Lackner, Dina G Tiniakos Diagnosis and Assessment of NAFLD: Definitions and Histopathological

Classification. Semin Liver Dis. (2015 Aug)

15.   J K Limdi, G M Hyde Evaluation of abnormal liver function tests. Postgrad Med J. (2003 Jun)

16.   Shivaraj Gowda, Prakash B Desai, Vinayak V Hull, Avinash A K Math, Sonal N Vernekar, Shruthi S Kulkarni A review on

laboratory liver function tests. Pan Afr Med J. (2009 Nov 22)

17.   Christiana Lucas, Georgia Lucas, Nicholas Lucas, Joanna Krzowska-Firych, Krzysztof Tomasiewicz A systematic review of the

present and future of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Exp Hepatol. (2018 Sep)

18.   Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes and its Panel on Folate,

Other B Vitamins, and Choline Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B 6, Folate, Vitamin B 12,
Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline.

19.   Federico Salomone, Fabio Galvano, Giovanni Li Volti Molecular Bases Underlying the Hepatoprotective Effects of Coffee.

Nutrients. (2017 Jan 23)

20.   Sung Gon Shim, Dae Won Jun, Eun Kyung Kim, Waqar Khalid Saeed, Kang Nyeong Lee, Hang Lak Lee, Oh Young Lee, Ho Soon
Choi, Byung Chul Yoon Caffeine attenuates liver fibrosis via defective adhesion of hepatic stellate cells in cirrhotic model. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol. (2013 Dec)

21.   Erikka Loftfield, Meredith S Shiels, Barry I Graubard, Hormuzd A Katki, Anil K Chaturvedi, Britton Trabert, Ligia A Pinto, Troy J

Kemp, Fatma M Shebl, Susan T Mayne, Nicolas Wentzensen, Mark P Purdue, Allan Hildesheim, Rashmi Sinha, Neal D Freedman
Associations of Coffee Drinking with Systemic Immune and Inflammatory Markers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. (2015
Jul)

22.   Fen Liu, Xiwei Wang, Gang Wu, Ling Chen, Peng Hu, Hong Ren, Huaidong Hu Coffee Consumption Decreases Risks for Hepatic

Fibrosis and Cirrhosis: A Meta-Analysis. PLoS One. (2015 Nov 10)

23.   Stefano Marventano, Federico Salomone, Justyna Godos, Francesca Pluchinotta, Daniele Del Rio, Antonio Mistretta, Giuseppe
Grosso Coffee and tea consumption in relation with non-alcoholic fatty liver and metabolic syndrome: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies. Clin Nutr. (2016 Dec)

24.   Karn Wijarnpreecha, Charat Thongprayoon, Patompong Ungprasert Coffee consumption and risk of nonalcoholic fatty liver

disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. (2017 Feb)

25.   O J Kennedy, P Roderick, R Buchanan, J A Fallowfield, P C Hayes, J Parkes Systematic review with meta-analysis: coffee

consumption and the risk of cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. (2016 Mar)

26.   Veeravich Jaruvongvanich, Anawin Sanguankeo, Nattawat Klomjit, Sikarin Upala Effects of caffeine consumption in patients

with chronic hepatitis C: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. (2017 Feb)

27.   Karn Wijarnpreecha, Charat Thongprayoon, Patompong Ungprasert Impact of caffeine in hepatitis C virus infection: a

systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. (2017 Jan)

28.   Yong-Ping Chen, Feng-Bin Lu, Yi-Bing Hu, Lan-Man Xu, Ming-Hua Zheng, En-De Hu A systematic review and a dose-response

meta-analysis of coffee dose and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Nutr. (2019 Dec)

28

29.   Abhishek Bhurwal, Puru Ratta, Sho Yoshitake, Lauren Pioppo, Debashish Reja, Peter Dellatore, Vinod Rustgi Inverse Association

of Coffee with Liver Cancer Development: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. (2020
Aug 19)

30.   Takashi Tamura, Asahi Hishida, Kenji Wakai Coffee consumption and liver cancer risk in Japan: a meta-analysis of six

prospective cohort studies. Nagoya J Med Sci. (2019 Feb)

31.   Oliver John Kennedy, Paul Roderick, Ryan Buchanan, Jonathan Andrew Fallowfield, Peter Clive Hayes, Julie Parkes Coffee,
including caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee, and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma: a systematic review and dose-
response meta-analysis. BMJ Open. (2017 May 9)

32.   Francesca Bravi, Alessandra Tavani, Cristina Bosetti, Paolo Boffetta, Carlo La Vecchia Coffee and the risk of hepatocellular

carcinoma and chronic liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Cancer Prev. (2017
Sep)

33.   Chengbo Yu, Qing Cao, Ping Chen, Shigui Yang, Min Deng, Yugang Wang, Lanjuan Li An updated dose-response meta-

analysis of coffee consumption and liver cancer risk. Sci Rep. (2016 Dec 2)

34.   Manav Wadhawan, Anil C Anand Coffee and Liver Disease. J Clin Exp Hepatol. (2016 Mar)

35.   Mester R, Toren P, Mizrachi I, Wolmer L, Karni N, Weizman A Caffeine withdrawal increases lithium blood levels. Biol Psychiatry.

(1995 Mar 1)

36.   McCusker RR, Goldberger BA, Cone EJ Caffeine content of energy drinks, carbonated sodas, and other beverages. J Anal

Toxicol. (2006 Mar)

37.   Desbrow B, Hall S, Irwin C Caffeine content of Nespresso® pod coffee. Nutr Health. (2019 Mar)

38.   Ludwig IA, Mena P, Calani L, Cid C, Del Rio D, Lean ME, Crozier A Variations in caffeine and chlorogenic acid contents of

coffees: what are we drinking?. Food Funct. (2014 Aug)

39.   Fox GP, Wu A, Yiran L, Force L Variation in caffeine concentration in single coffee beans. J Agric Food Chem. (2013 Nov 13)

40.   McCusker RR, Goldberger BA, Cone EJ Caffeine content of specialty coffees. J Anal Toxicol. (2003 Oct)

41.   Angeloni G, Guerrini L, Masella P, Bellumori M, Daluiso S, Parenti A, Innocenti M What kind of coffee do you drink? An

investigation on effects of eight different extraction methods. Food Res Int. (2019 Feb)

42.   K Ramalakshmi, B Raghavan Caffeine in coffee: its removal. Why and how?. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. (1999 Sep)

43.   C Cavin, D Holzhaeuser, G Scharf, A Constable, W W Huber, B Schilter Cafestol and kahweol, two coffee specific diterpenes

with anticarcinogenic activity. Food Chem Toxicol. (2002 Aug)

44.   Apurva A Modi, Jordan J Feld, Yoon Park, David E Kleiner, James E Everhart, T Jake Liang, Jay H Hoofnagle Increased

caffeine consumption is associated with reduced hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology. (2010 Jan)

45.   EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA) Safety of caffeine. EFSA Journal. (2015 MAY)

46.   Food and Nutrition Board Caffeine in Food and Dietary Supplements: Examining Safety: Workshop Summary.. The National

Academies Press. (2014 APR)

47.   Nawrot P, Jordan S, Eastwood J, Rotstein J, Hugenholtz A, Feeley M Effects of caffeine on human health. Food Addit Contam.

(2003 Jan)

48.   Wikoff D, Welsh BT, Henderson R, Brorby GP, Britt J, Myers E, Goldberger J, Lieberman HR, O'Brien C, Peck J, Tenenbein M,

Weaver C, Harvey S, Urban J, Doepker C Systematic review of the potential adverse effects of caffeine consumption in healthy
adults, pregnant women, adolescents, and children. Food Chem Toxicol. (2017 Nov)

49.   Giannelli M, Doyle P, Roman E, Pelerin M, Hermon C The effect of caffeine consumption and nausea on the risk of miscarriage.

Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. (2003 Oct)

50.   Morgan S, Koren G, Bozzo P Is caffeine consumption safe during pregnancy?. Can Fam Physician. (2013 Apr)

51.   Voskoboinik A, Kalman JM, Kistler PM Caffeine and Arrhythmias: Time to Grind the Data. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. (2018 Apr)

52.   Knutti R, Rothweiler H, Schlatter C The effect of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics of caffeine. Arch Toxicol Suppl. (1982)

53.   Committee on Military Nutrition Research, Food and Nutrition Board Caffeine for the Sustainment of Mental Task Performance:

Formulations for Military Operations.

54.   Jericho Hallare, Valerie Gerriets Half Life.

55.   Ferreira-Hermosillo A, Torres-Duran PV, Juarez-Oropeza MA Hepatoprotective effects of Spirulina maxima in patients with non-

alcoholic fatty liver disease: a case series. J Med Case Rep. (2010 Apr 7)

56.   Kwak MS, Kim D Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and lifestyle modifications, focusing on physical activity. Korean J Intern

Med. (2018 Jan)

57.   Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Daniels SR, Donato KA, Eckel RH, Franklin BA, Gordon DJ, Krauss RM, Savage PJ, Smith SC Jr,

Spertus JA, Costa F, American Heart Association, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Diagnosis and management of the
metabolic syndrome: an American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Scientific Statement. Circulation.
(2005 Oct 25)

58.   Pérez-Martínez P, Mikhailidis DP, Athyros VG, Bullo M, Couture P, Covas MI, de Koning L, Delgado-Lista J, Díaz-López A,

Drevon CA, Estruch R, Esposito K, Fitó M, Garaulet M, Giugliano D, García-Ríos A, Katsiki N, Kolovou G, Lamarche B, Maiorino MI,

29

Mena-Sánchez G, Muñoz-Garach A, Nikolic D, Ordovás JM, Pérez-Jiménez F, Rizzo M, Salas-Salvadó J, Schröder H, Tinahones
FJ, de la Torre R, van Ommen B, Wopereis S, Ros E, López-Miranda J Lifestyle recommendations for the prevention and
management of metabolic syndrome: an international panel recommendation. Nutr Rev. (2017 May 1)

30

