Joint Health Supplement Guide

Written By: Wyatt Brown, Antonis Damianou, & Adel Moussa

Edited By: Molly Gregas

Reviewed By: Wyatt Brown, & Molly Gregas

Table of Contents

Introduction

Combos

Primary Supplements

Secondary Supplements

Promising Supplements

Unproven Supplements

Inadvisable Supplements

FAQ

2

Introduction

Many people with persistent and painful joint issues search for solutions, and intermittent or chronic joint

pains are common in people of many ages.

Common doesn’t mean simple, however. Joint health is a highly complex topic — it’s not like fat loss, which,

although it can be complicated in practice, nonetheless has a basic formula that underlies any successful

strategy: take in less energy than you expend.

To address joint pain, there’s no formula, and the “strategy” tends to look like more this: just keep trying.

Don’t fall for “snake oil” or useless remedies — or at least not too often.

Joint pain can affect quality of life, but it’s possible to reduce joint pain, even if someone has “tried

everything”, but it definitely helps to understand a bit about joint pain physiology and why the best

treatment plans aren’t simple.

The reason that joint issues are so complex is quite interesting. There are many ways that joints can

become damaged: by forcing past their range of motion (e.g., an ACL tear in the knee), by routinely

perturbing their surroundings (e.g., by letting repetitive stress, positioning, or load compress one of the

shoulder joints), or through more insidious processes (e.g., degradation due to aging, disease, or genetics).

The multiplicity of possible causes, which often intersect and overlap, makes addressing joint pain difficult,

as does the complexity of the joint tissue itself. The following highlights just a few components of articular

cartilage:

What is cartilage

When joints are working smoothly, people don’t tend to notice or think about them at all. It’s only when they

stop working well ​

​— and continue to “not work” — that they become a persistent issue and a subject of

persistent worry. And that’s where much of the problem lies.

3

 
 Digging Deeper: Weird joint pain 101

Why do some cases of joint pain resolve quickly, whereas others worsen or stay the same?

Unfortunately, this topic isn’t well understood,[1] and individual cases are seldom solved within a 15-

minute medical appointment.

Physical therapy and anti-inflammatories (e.g., NSAIDs) may provide some relief; if neither helps,

surgery may be an option. Such is the traditional approach to joint pain; it is simplistic and fraught

with problems, of which we’ll mention only a couple:

Lasting joint pain can often be blamed on inflammatory tendonitis, and physicians may not look any further.
It could also be caused by noninflammatory tendinosis[2] (if, for example, the tendon tissue has degenerated
past the point of having an inflammatory response to injury).

Several types of joint surgeries have recently been found to be much less effective than assumed,
prompting guidelines that advise against surgery as a primary option.[3]

It’s worth the trouble to ask a lot of questions. Weird joint pain is worth digging into, possibly via

second opinions along with self-education. Joint pain may stem from a condition as common (yet

complex and difficult to treat) as fibromyalgia,[4] or as rare as Fabry disease.[5] It could also be the

result of an old injury that hasn’t healed due to diet or lifestyle factors. The only way to find out is to

keep exploring.

Humans, with our relatively defenseless bodies, have a fairly robust alarm system that warns our big brains

that the body is indirectly in danger (for our distant ancestors, a damaged joint could easily lead to danger

or death). Pain is a helpful signal when it works correctly because it helps us live out our long human

lifespans. Therefore, to ensure survival, the body can become “better and better” at experiencing pain; in

other words, the nervous system lowers the threshold at which signals are interpreted as painful (through

varied mechanisms, notably central sensitization[6]).

Humans respond to pain much differently from most other mammals, which is why painkillers that work in

animal studies often fail in human studies.[7] In humans, there is a pretty clear dichotomy: acute pain (e.g.,

from overexertion at the gym) responds well to medication and other interventions but chronic pain (sadly)

does not.[8]

If that were the only sticking point, treatment for joint pain would be merely difficult — but joint-pain

complexities don’t stop there. Why did Tiger Woods rack up so many injuries after his first one? Why do

individuals often develop multiple chronic conditions, with triads such as arthritic joints plus fibromyalgia

plus depression? Here are three common reasons:

Fear of reinjury. If you get hurt, and your performance suffers (your lifts go down or race times get

worse, etc.), a bunch of things can change at once.[9] You start to compensate for the injured joint,

you start to resent rehab and physical therapy, and if the pain doesn’t go away, you slowly start to

shy away from physical activity. In other words, you begin a cycle in which other joints get injured

and you become overall less fit.

4

Sleep issues. For people who haven’t been sleeping well for months or even years, “sleep issues” is

a grating euphemism. Pain can be a sleep bulldozer, with studies showing that over half of people

with joint pain also suffer from disturbed sleep.[10] Sleep problems tend to worsen with the severity

of joint pain, so a nagging knee injury could be merely annoying, but severe knee arthritis could

stop sleep in its tracks.[11]

The perfect storm. Let’s say you’re heading for the Olympics and aim to set up the optimal

conditions to net you a gold medal. Everything you want to ensure (good sleep, support from

family and friends, mental and physical well-being) is the opposite of what you’ll get with chronic

joint pain. Disturbed sleep is often the catalyst of this perfect storm.[12] For example, you wake up

tired, your pain sensitivity is higher, your family and friends can’t relate to you and sometimes get

secretly annoyed, and your body feels less than ready to perform. If this cycle repeats for a few

days, it’s hard to climb out of the pain hole.

We’ve established that having chronic joint pain means turning into Sisyphus: you keep trying to roll that

pain boulder up the hill, but it’s too heavy. Disturbed sleep, failed treatments, fat gain and muscle loss —

these factors are hard to overcome.

Luckily, thousands of studies have been conducted on joint pain. Before distilling them into tips, however,

let’s review three very important points.

First, remember that no single study will be the silver bullet that eliminates pain. There are so many different

causes for joint pain, and only “snake oil” therapies claim to address them all. In fact, the term snake oil was

originally used to describe a literal snake oil therapy for joint pain used in Traditional Chinese Medicine

(TCM).

5

 Digging Deeper: A unified theory of pain?

A few academics have proposed unified theories of pain, centered around areas such as

inflammation or the nervous system.[13] Similarly, a plethora of researchers, academic and

nonacademic, will say that there’s a simple, single cause behind most of your health issues — some

claim that when it comes to osteoarthritis, nightshade vegetables are the main culprit, others say that

gluten is to blame for many of today’s pains and ailments, and yet others state that those pains and

ailments derive from a lack of direct contact with the bare earth.[14]

Common nightshade vegetables and herbs

Ashwagandha

Cayenne pepper

Goji berry

Paprika

Potatoes
(excluding sweet potatoes)

Tobacco

Eggplants

Peppers/Chili peppers

Tomatoes/Tomatillos

Reference: USDA Plants Database. Accessed September 12, 2020.

It’s certainly tempting to believe that a person’s health issues all share a single cause because that

would mean that addressing that one cause will make it all better, in one stroke. But, as implied by

the very number of conflicting opinions on the nature of that cause, reality is much messier.

Admittedly, on the theoretical side, it’s interesting to tie together various pain mechanisms, but the

factors involved (dietary, environmental, psychological, among others) are simply too diverse to be

distilled into one neat system. And yes, on the practical side, single triggers such as gluten might be

at the root of multiple health issues — in some individuals. However, even if a person belongs to the

minority of people who gluten adversely affects, embarking on a gluten-free diet isn’t likely to make

all of the ills magically disappear.

This is unwelcome knowledge. If chronic pain could be traced down to one cause, it would be quite

easier to treat!

Second, remember that any given individual will not see immediate benefits from most therapies. Joint pain

takes a while to resolve, and “a while” could range from a couple of weeks to many months. Also, different

people respond differently to the same treatment because human bodies are highly variable and highly

complex.

Third, remember that the benefits that any individual experiences might be difficult to assess. Pain

management isn’t like muscle gain or fat loss, where one can track pounds or see those biceps veins

become more prominent; there is no easy way to quantify pain, and some days will be worse than others

due to mysterious factors.

And now onto the “tips” (a term which greatly undersells what they are — they should instead be called

Very Important Pointers That Will Help If You Follow Them).

6

Follow the sun. No huge randomized trial has been conducted on the effect of sun exposure on pain — or on any
other condition, for that matter. There’s simply no financial incentive because the sun can’t be patented. That said,
circadian rhythm may be the most important factor in treating pain. Sunlight may decrease pain after joint
surgery,[15] and UV tanning beds have been shown to decrease pain from fibromyalgia.[16] These clues are just two
out of many that point to a simple message: get as much natural light as possible during the day and as little
artificial bright light as you can at night.

Maintain a healthy weight. This one especially matters for knee pain. During walking, each 0.5 kg (1 lb) of excess
weight has the effect of about 1.8 kg (4 lb) of extra load on the knees. If a person is just 4.5 kg (10 lb) overweight,
that’s 18 kg (40 lb) of extra load per step — and 21,772 kg (48,000 lb) of cumulative load per 1.6 km (1 mile,
assuming 1,200 steps).[17]

Train the brain. It may seem that the pain is in the knee, but it’s not. It’s also in the brain and nervous system. Signals
going up to the brain and back down to the joint modify what a person feels, so that a damaged joint that is painful
to one person may hardly be felt by another.[18] Although it’s not possible to “think away” joint pain, mindfulness
meditation appears to reduce pain.[19] It may sound hokey, but something as minor as reframing might train the brain
to perceive pain differently.

Help your gut bacteria help you. No probiotic has ever been shown to universally relieve pain, probably because
different people have such different microbiomes and because there’s only so much one single strain can do when
living among the hundreds of others in the gut. Still, certain bacterial strains have shown benefit for specific painful
conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis.[20] Supplementing with probiotics matters less than general care of the gut
though, like avoiding too much processed junk food.[21][22] By decreasing the chance of activating the immune
system inappropriately, a happy gut microbiome leads to less pain over time.

Pain science undergoes major new developments seemingly every few months. Nevertheless, chronic pain

not only persists, but more and more people have joint pain each year. Don’t fall for the common trap of

trying quick fix after quick fix and wasting a lot of money along the way.

A wise strategy for dealing with recalcitrant joint pain is to act slowly and mindfully: figure out which

treatments are most likely to net some benefit, pick a couple, and stick with them for at least a few weeks.

It’s easy to try some hyped-up treatment and then be disappointed when it doesn’t work. It’s harder to try,

over weeks and months, to soothe the brain and gut, get more sunshine, and take just a supplement or two

from those presented in this guide. But joint pain is a unique enemy, and to combat it, a uniquely wise

strategy is needed. Best of luck.

Kamal Patel, Co-founder and Director

MBA, MPH, PhD(c) in Nutrition

7

Combos

Disclaimer about supplement quality

We expect that readers will do their due diligence when choosing products. Depending on the

manufacturer, supplements may have inaccurate labels (i.e., they contain too much or too little of the

ingredients they claim, or in some cases, significant amounts of other ingredients not listed). They may also

contain significant amounts of contaminants such as heavy metals or pesticides. It is also possible for

supplements to contain ingredients that people are commonly allergic to, and it’s important to be aware of

the nonmedicinal ingredients as well. As a brief introduction to vetting manufacturers, we drew up a short

list of steps you should take if a product has caught your interest.

 Tip: Why don’t you recommend brands or specific products?

For two reasons:

We don’t test physical products. What our researchers do — all day, every day — is analyze

peer-reviewed studies on supplements and nutrition.

We go to great lengths to protect our integrity. As you’ve probably noticed, we don’t sell

supplements or even show ads from supplement companies, even though either option would

generate a lot more money than our Supplement Guides ever will — and for a lot less work,

too.

If we recommended any brands or specific products, our integrity would be called into question, so…

we can’t do it.

Core Combo

Joint pain is caused by a variety of factors. Because no supplement can address all of them, there is no

core supplement in this guide.

Specialized Combos

8

 Tip: Try one combo alone for a few weeks

Taking too many supplements at once may prevent you from determining which ones are truly

working. Start with just one of the combos suggested here for a couple of weeks before you

consider making any modification, such as adding another supplement, altering the dosage of a

supplement, or incorporating the supplements from an additional combo.

When adding another supplement to your regimen, be methodical. For example, you may want to

take all the supplements from two combos. Select the combo that you wish to try first and take this

for a couple of weeks. Next, add one supplement from the second combo and wait another week to

see how it affects you. Continue this process until you’ve added all the supplements you want to try.

If a supplement appears in two combos that you wish to combine, don’t stack the doses; instead,

combine the ranges. For instance, if the range of a supplement is 2–4 mg in one combo and 3–6 mg

in the other, your new range becomes 2–6 mg. Always start with the lower end of the range —

especially in this case, because the reason for why one of the ranges has a lower ceiling in one

combo may be due to a synergy with another supplement in the same combo. Reading through the

full supplement entry may help you decide which dose to aim for, but if you’re not sure, lower is

usually safer.

For people with osteoarthritis

Take 400–1000 mg of Curcumin (depending on type, explained below) per day, with food, and some

collagen in the form of undenatured type-II collagen (40 mg), hydrolyzed collagen (10 grams), or gelatin

(10–15 grams).

After one month, if the results aren’t satisfactory, add Boswellia serrata to the regimen. If that still proves

insufficient, methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) at a total dose of approximately 3,375 mg (split into three doses

of 1,125 mg each day) may improve the combo and have additional effects.

Studies on Boswellia serrata tend to use one of two patented extracts: 5-Loxin and Aflapin. To supplement

with either, take 100–250 mg once per day. Alternatively, try taking 1,800 mg of the plant’s gum oleoresin

three times a day (i.e., 5,400 mg/day).

Curcumin is a component of turmeric (aka Curcuma longa). Its bioavailability can be greatly increased by

taking it with piperine (a black pepper extract) or by combining it with lipids (e.g., BCM-95, Meriva). To

supplement curcumin with piperine, take 500 mg of the former with 20 mg of the latter, three times per day

(i.e., 1.5 grams of curcumin and 60 mg of piperine per day). To supplement with BCM-95 or Meriva, take

500 mg twice per day (i.e., 1 g/day).

It is unclear where glucosamine and chondroitin might fit into a combo, as the main reason to take them is

to reduce the rate of joint deterioration, but this is speculative. Chondroitin is generally taken in a dose of

1,200 mg of chondroitin sulfate.

9

 
 
For people with rheumatoid arthritis

Take 3 grams of combined EPA and DHA per day by eating fatty fish (e.g., 200 grams of salmon) or by

taking fish oil softgels (with food, to reduce the chance of fishy burps). Vegans and vegetarians have the

option of taking algal oil softgels. Be sure to read the warnings section, as there is potentially a trade off

with atrial fibrillation risk.

In addition, take 40 mg of undenatured type-II collagen once per day.

If there have been no improvements after a month, consider taking curcumin in the doses listed for

osteoarthritis, but know that its utility for rheumatoid arthritis is still speculative, though the preliminary

evidence is encouraging.

For people at risk of complex regional pain
syndrome (CRPS)

Take 500 mg of vitamin C once per day, ideally in the morning.

For people with joint pain related to athletics

Try the “rheumatoid arthritis” combo above. An option is to replace the undenatured type-II collagen (40

mg) by some hydrolyzed collagen (10 grams) or some gelatin (10–15 grams).

Remember that supplementation should not serve as primary treatment for injuries. It can be used as

ancillary treatment and to alleviate the pain while tending to an injury.

For people with joint pain unrelated to a disease
or to athletics

Try the “rheumatoid arthritis” combo above. An option is to replace the undenatured type-II collagen (40

mg) by some hydrolyzed collagen (10 grams) or some gelatin (10–15 grams).

If pain persists, add the “osteoarthritis” combo above. Although collagen is a supplement in both

specialized combos, taking both specialized combos doesn’t mean doubling the collagen dose.

What has changed since the last time?

It should be noted that we changed the names of our ranking categories. “Core” (the highest) is now

“primary”, “primary” is now “secondary”, and “secondary” is now “promising”. This nomenclature has already

been implemented for some guides, but this is the first update to the Joint Health Guide that uses this new

terminology. For example, if it was a core supplement in the previous issue and now it’s a secondary

supplement in this issue, we’ll say that it was a primary supplement in the previous issue and is now a

secondary supplement.

Added:

10

Saffron (unproven)

Changed ranking:

Chondroitin and glucosamine

Downgraded from secondary to promising. It seems less and less likely that these supplements have

clinically significant long-term effects on osteoarthritis pain and function, and there are better options for

osteoarthritis. However, they may reduce long-term joint damage, though more research is needed.

Pharmaceutical-grade supplements may work better, but more research is needed on that topic too.

Cissus quadrangularis

Downgraded from promising to unproven. This change is simply due to our change in evidence standards.

Although it makes mechanistic sense that Cissus quadrangularis would help with osteoarthritis, the small

number of trials that have been conducted preclude any conclusions at this time.

Clarified:

Vitamin C

Vitamin C is promising for the prevention of complex regional pain syndrome, but solid evidence supporting

its use for any other source of joint pain is lacking.

11

Primary Supplements

Why are there no primary supplements in this
guide?

Joint pain is caused by a variety of factors. Because no supplement can address all of these factors, there

is no recommended primary supplement. Additionally, some supplements have a lot of supporting evidence

but the effects are modest at best, or the effects look more potent but the evidence doesn’t warrant a high

degree of confidence.

12

Secondary Supplements

Boswellia Serrata

What makes Boswellia serrata a secondary
supplement

Boswellia serrata is a plant used in Ayurvedic medicine primarily to alleviate joint pain. The effects of

Boswellia serrata may largely be attributed to one of its main bioactive compounds, acetyl-11-keto-β-

boswellic acid (AKBA), which is a potent inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase, an enzyme responsible for

inflammation.[23][24]

According to a 2020 meta-analysis of 7 randomized controlled trials, men and women with osteoarthritis

who supplemented with Boswellia serrata or its extracts experienced small to moderate improvements in

joint pain, stiffness, and function after 4 weeks of treatment.[25] Importantly, these improvements were 2–3

times greater in trials with treatment periods lasting 12 weeks. However, it’s worth keeping in mind that (i)

in 4 of the 7 trials, Boswellia serrata extract was taken together with curcumin, silverberry, or

methylsulfonylmethane (MSM), components that may have beneficial effects on osteoarthritis symptoms of

their own, and (ii) most of the trials included in the meta-analysis had an unclear or high risk of bias.

With the above said, other trials that examined the effects of Boswellia serrata extract on its own in

participants with knee osteoarthritis have also reported large beneficial effects on osteoarthritis

symptoms.[26][27][28] One of these trials examined the effects of Boswellia serrata extract, compared to

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), in adults with osteoarthritis. After 6 months, the

participants who took Boswellia serrata reported improvements in knee pain, stiffness, and function that

were similar to those of the participants who took NSAIDs. Notably, one month after the cessation of the

treatments, the beneficial effects were maintained only in the Boswellia serrata group.

More evidence is needed before Boswellia serrata can be said to help people with rheumatoid arthritis.

What is osteoarthritis?

13

 
In Ayurvedic medicine, Boswellia serrata is often used alongside Curcuma longa (turmeric), a plant that

contains curcumin. Further research is needed to determine whether these two supplements actually have

synergistic properties.

How to take Boswellia serrata

Most studies reporting benefits of Boswellia serrata have used one of three patented extracts, namely,

Aflapin, Loxin, and WokVel. Aflapin and Loxin (standardized to contain at least 20% and 30% of AKBA,

respectively) have been used in daily doses of 100–250 milligrams, whereas WokVel (which contains around

6%–9% of AKBA) has been used in daily doses of up to 999 milligrams. Of these extracts, Aflapin seems to

have better overall anti-inflammatory effects due to its increased bioavailability, which results in more

AKBA reaching systemic circulation.[29] To supplement with Boswellia serrata, take 100–250 mg of Aflapin

(preferably) or Loxin once per day with food. Another alternative is to take 1,800 mg of the plant’s gum

oleoresin three times a day (i.e., 5,400 mg/day).

Like curcumin, Boswellia serrata has been combined with lipids to increase its bioavailability (the same

company that makes Meriva for curcumin makes Casperome for Boswellia serrata), but further research is

needed to determine a dosage for joint health.

People who take Boswellia serrata may see a reduction in pain (e.g., −11.19 to −5.46 mm on a visual analog

scale of 100 mm or −22.36 to −6.09 out of 100 on the WOMAC questionnaire pain subscale, as measured in

studies). Pain may continue to improve for at least 12 weeks after beginning daily supplementation.

Warnings about Boswellia serrata

Boswellia serrata is generally well tolerated, with some reports of gastrointestinal effects including

abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea and acid reflux.[30] There are also rare reports of itchy skin and contact

dermatitis.[31] However, studies generally haven’t shown an increase in adverse events relative to

control.[25][26][32][33][34]

There’s a case study of a Boswellia extract in a skin cream causing an allergic reaction, though it’s unclear

how common this is.[35]

Boswellia serrata may inhibit platelet aggregation and might cause excessive bleeding, particularly in

combination with blood-thinning medication.[36] However, this effect has not been evaluated clinically and is

highly speculative.

Boswellia serrata may not be safe to use in pregnancy. Although studies on this topic are inconclusive,

individuals who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should consider safer options.

Collagen

What makes collagen a secondary supplement

Osteoarthritis involves damage to joint cartilage, and collagen is a major component of cartilage, so it’s

14

 
possible that taking collagen can help repair cartilage; this hypothesis has been demonstrated to be

plausible in several preclinical studies.[37] Whole collagen won’t be digested and become incorporated into

cartilage directly, but it will be digested into smaller components, which can then be used to synthesize

collagen.[38][39]

How cartilage degrades in osteoarthritis vs. rheumatoid arthritis

Adapted from Smolen and Aletaha. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2015.[40]

The real question is always: how effective is it? Based on 13 randomized trials that evaluated collagen for

osteoarthritis or other forms of joint pain, the evidence is largely in favor of modest improvements in the

overall symptoms of osteoarthritis.[41][42][43][44][43][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52] The main reason to be skeptical of these

findings, or at least of the potency of collagen, is that the available research is mainly funded by industry

(or it was unclear whether it was), and although these studies used basic measures to protect against bias,

there aren’t enough truly high-quality trials without industry funding to have a high level of confidence in

collagen.

The most effective dose of collagen isn’t yet clear, but positive studies have tended to use 10 grams of

hydrolyzed collagen or 40 mg of undenatured type II collagen (UCP-II).

Athletes who take collagen to prevent activity-related joint pain may see a modest benefit from 5–10

grams, but more research is needed to be precise about the optimal dose or to have confidence in its utility

in this case.[53][54][55]

How to take collagen

To supplement with undenatured type-II collagen (UC-II), take 40 mg/day of a UC-II cartilage supplement,

which will yield 10 mg/day of native type-II collagen.

To supplement with hydrolyzed collagen (also known as collagen hydrolysate), take 10 g/day.

15

To supplement with gelatin, take 10–15 g/day. Keep in mind that although true gelatin is composed of pure

collagen (i.e., pure protein), the dessert called gelatin often has very little collagen in it.

With respect to the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) and

expressed in terms of a 5-point scale, people taking collagen can expect a change of −0.74 to −0.08 for

stiffness, but not a reliable change in pain. On a visual analog scale of 0–100 mm, however, they may see a

change of −26.24 to −2.87 mm.

Warnings about collagen

Collagen appears to be safe at a dosage of up to 10 grams daily for 6 months.[46] One study found

gastrointestinal side effects, including diarrhea and indigestion, but they were relatively rare, and no

placebo group was used.[56] In general, studies have failed to find convincing evidence of an increase in

adverse events relative to placebo. This makes sense because collagen is a protein that the body can

readily digest and which is synthesized endogenously in large amounts. However, as the dose of collagen

increases, the risk for gastrointestinal side effects may increase, and it’s unclear what effects might occur

at dosages that exceed 10 g/day. For this reason, it may be prudent to slowly increase the dose of

collagen.

Curcumin

What makes curcumin a secondary supplement

Curcumin is a component of Curcuma longa or turmeric. It can inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes and

thus reduce inflammation in the body, so its action is similar to that of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

(NSAIDs).[57]

Several clinical trials have investigated the effects of turmeric extracts or curcuminoids on osteoarthritis

symptoms — most commonly knee pain and physical function.[58][59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67][68][69][70] The results of

these trials have been summarized in a number of meta-analyses.[71][72][73][74][75] Overall, the findings suggest

that supplementation with turmeric extracts/curcuminoids improves osteoarthritis symptoms to a

moderate–large degree, as compared to placebo, and that these effects are comparable to those of

NSAIDs. One important caveat is that many of the trials were assessed as having an unclear or high risk of

bias, with several trials funded by the supplement industry. Although these trials may be at a higher risk of

reporting positive findings, trials of a high methodological quality and a low risk of bias have largely

reported positive findings as well.

16

 
Curcumin’s effects on patients with osteoarthritis

Reference: Belcaro et al. Altern Med Rev. 2010.[59]

In Ayurvedic medicine, Curcuma longa is often used alongside Boswellia serrata. Further research is needed

to determine whether these two supplements actually have synergistic properties.

A few trials have also examined the effects of curcumin supplementation on symptoms of rheumatoid

arthritis — mainly disease activity and joint pain.[76][77][78][79]. Most of these trials have reported moderate–

large improvements in disease activity and joint pain with curcumin supplementation, as compared to

placebo. However, it should be noted that most of the aforementioned trials were industry funded.

How to take curcumin

By itself, curcumin is poorly absorbed. Among the methods devised to address the issue, the two most

common (and most often tested) have paired curcumin with piperine (a black pepper extract) or combined

it with lipids (e.g., BCM-95® and Meriva®, among others).

17

To supplement with curcumin + piperine, take 500 mg of curcumin with 20 mg of piperine three times per

day (i.e., 1,500 mg of curcumin and 60 mg of piperine per day).

To supplement with *BCM-95®, a patented combination of curcumin and essential oils, take 500 mg twice

per day (i.e., 1,000 mg/day).

To supplement with Meriva®, a patented combination of curcumin and soy lecithin, take 200–500 mg twice

per day (i.e., 400–1,000 mg/day).

Curcumin is usually taken together with food.

People who take curcumin for osteoarthritis may see a change on the Western Ontario and McMaster

Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC) of −1.31, which is a change of −0.24 standard deviations overall. For

stiffness in particular, these changes may reach −1.29 (a change of 0.06 standard deviations), and for

function, these changes may reach −2.59 (−0.27 standard deviations). On a visual analogue scale, people

who supplement with curcumin may see a change in pain of −2.93 (−0.69 standard deviations).

Warnings about curcumin

Curcumin seems to be well tolerated. Some studies have reported a small amount of GI-related side

effects.[80][65] Rare, individual reports of hepatitis associated with taking turmeric have also occurred.[81][82] The

reason for this effect is unclear, but it is possible that it involves contamination (e.g., formulations with a

high heavy metal content). It is unclear whether the same concerns apply to curcumin extract, but

regardless, it is important to only buy from companies whose products have been tested independently.

Piperine is a potent inhibitor of a variety of cytochrome P450 enzymes, which is one part of what makes it

a curcumin enhancer and of potential use for augmenting the effects of other drugs; in other words, it can

reduce the rate of drug metabolism.[83][84][85] However, this property may make some medications more

potent and lead to excessive effects. As such, it may be prudent to talk to a doctor or pharmacist before

combining piperine and medications.

The same goes for curcumin itself, which has the ability to inhibit a variety of cytochrome P450 enzymes,

albeit to a lesser extent.[83][86]

Curcumin may increase the risk of bleeding by interacting with anticoagulants such as warfarin and

antiplatelets such as aspirin.[87][88] Taking curcumin with diabetes medication such as glyburide may increase

the risk of low blood sugar.[89]

Some athletes use curcumin to fight muscle inflammation. In theory, curcumin should have effects similar in

nature and potency to those of aspirin, and rodent studies on this aspect are promising, but human studies

are needed for confirmation.

Fish Oil

What makes fish oil a secondary supplement

Fish oil is believed to be one of the most potent anti-inflammatory agents in our diet. Arthritis of the joints

18

 
is an inflammatory disease, and accordingly, it seems obvious that the multifactorial anti-inflammatory

effects of 20:5 (n−3) eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and 22:6 (n−3) docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) from fish

and other marine products like krill or algae have attracted the attention of both researchers and people

with joint pain.

Good evidence of the beneficial effects of fish oil exists for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a condition in which a

person’s own immune system attacks and compromises the structural integrity of the joints.[90] Significantly

less evidence exists for nonrheumatic osteoarthritis (OA). Although their etiologies (i.e., the specific causes

and courses of the diseases) may be different, both OA and RA go hand in hand with increased levels of

common markers of inflammation such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-17,

and others. Many of these cytokines are reduced in response to EPA and DHA supplements in various

nonarthritic inflammatory diseases, most prominently metabolic disease.[91] Therefore, it is only mildly

surprising that the results of observational and experimental studies investigating the putative beneficial

effects of long-chain omega-3 supplementation in people with rheumatoid arthritis have reported positive

results.

In line with previous systematic reviews,[92][93][94] the results of a more recent meta-analysis of the putative

benefits of fish oil supplement in people with RA[95] clearly suggest small but practically relevant reductions

in disease symptoms. A systematic review by the same authors assessed 20 experimental trials (all

published before the end of July 2016) that reported the use of “fish oil” from various sources. The fish oils

contained between the standard 0.3 g/day of EPA+DHA found in common commercial fish oil supplements

and up to 9.6 g/day of combined EPA+DHA from multiple doses of medical-grade fish oil. However, there

was no evidence of existing dose-effect relationships. The study durations were between 12 and 72 weeks,

and methodological differences made it difficult to weigh and compare the input data, which the

researchers deemed mostly at a low-to-medium risk of bias. After pooling and analyzing the data, the

authors reported a predominantly positive and small effect on the participants’ subjective disease

assessments (see Table 1 for an overview of selected markers), which is a positive result, albeit with effect

sizes that do not warrant categorizing fish oil as a primary option.

Notwithstanding the significant reductions in symptoms and although all studies were conducted in

participants with RA (in whom autoimmune-induced inflammation is thought to fuel the progressive

structural erosion of the joints), neither the meta-analysis nor the other currently available studies have

reported consistent effects on objectively measurable blood markers of inflammation.

This lack of effect on the levels of arthritis-specific blood markers and general inflammatory cytokines in

the blood is a recurring theme in the literature on fish oil interventions in both people with RA and OA for

whom the inflammation can be viewed as correlated with (but not the origin of) joint damage and pain. For

example, one of these studies[96] recruited older and generally healthy participants with overweight and

obesity. The results confirmed positive effects on arthritic pain (medium effect size) and general disease

burden (small effect size), but the study authors did not observe clinically relevant improvements in

markers of inflammation. Research into the influence of EPA's and DHA's direct and indirect effects on

cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX) enzymes and their competition with arachidonic acid[97]

seems necessary to determine the exact mechanism behind the observable benefits for people with

arthritis.

Moreover, it is important to keep in mind that pain in the knees, elbows, fingers, toes, and other joints is not

an age-specific or disease-specific phenomenon. Overweight and obesity are common correlates of joint

pain in younger people, and transient and even chronic joint pain can also be observed in otherwise healthy,

recreationally active or even athletic parts of the population with normal weights. The underlying cause of

pain is often not clear, and it often predates observable osteoarthritic damage and/or rheumatoid

inflammation of the sore joints. Conventional wisdom often ascribes this form of joint pain to a lack of

19

“lubrication of the joints”, which could hypothetically be restored by fish oil in the same way that WD40

lubricates mechanical junctions in cars, bikes, and other machines. Anecdotal evidence from the health and

fitness community seems to confirm that hypothesis. However, scientific evidence that supports the use

and usefulness of fish oil supplements in individuals without arthritic joint pain is scarce. We have found

only 4 studies[98][99][100][101] that examined the effects of fish oil in participants without established arthritis and

only one study in participants complaining of "mild knee pain" in the absence of diagnosed changes in joint

integrity or autoimmunity.[100]

That does not necessarily mean that people with mild or even no pain cannot benefit from fish oil

supplements — it just leaves us with insufficient evidence to recommend fish oil as a "joint supplement"

across the board.

Most importantly, future studies should investigate the effects of fish oil in participants without arthritis —

healthy, young, normal-weight and athletic populations, in particular. The only study to date that at least

supports the notion of preventative benefits in people without arthritis comes from the Harvard Medical

School.[99] This study was a reanalysis of data from a year-long intervention study in older adults (average

age of 63), without arthritis but with coronary artery disease (CAD), who received a relatively high dose of

fish oil (1.86 grams of EPA and 1.5 grams of DHA; Lovazza™). In addition to its length and high number of

participants, this study sticks out for two reasons: (a) it focused on a group with (on average) negligible

joint issues at the beginning of the study, and (b) it still found improvements in joint stiffness and physical

function. However, most importantly, these improvements correlated with (i) significant increases in

voluntary physical activity and (ii) a reduced number of joint replacements compared to the no-treatment

control group (1 vs. 11, respectively; p = 0.002). It should be obvious, though, that a mechanistic link

between (b) improvements in joint stiffness and physical function and outcomes (i) and (ii) cannot be

established. Moreover, even if the causative nature of the interaction could be confirmed, a single study in a

very specific group of participants without arthritis would not warrant a general recommendation for fish oil

as a proven and effective "joint supplement" with preventative effects. As a mere preventative means, fish

oil must thus be rated only as a secondary option.

How to take fish oil

Take 1–3 g/day of combined EPA and DHA.

Note: This number is not identical to the total quantity of "fish oil" on the label. Most commercial products

contain only 180 mg of EPA and 120 mg of DHA (400 mg total of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids) per

capsule. Accordingly, a person would have to take at least 3–4 capsules per day.

A clear dose-response relationship has not been established.

A potential superiority of EPA over DHA has been suggested but needs further investigation. The same

goes for putative differences between triglyceride-bound (regular fish oil), phospholipid-bound (krill oil),

and the ethyl-ester varieties doctors may prescribe.

People who take fish oil for rheumatoid arthritis may see a change in pain of −0.42 to 0 standard

deviations.

Warnings about fish oil

Fish oil is known to cause gastrointestinal side effects, including abdominal pain and diarrhea, in some

people.[102][103] Taking fish oil with food may help avoid these unwanted side effects.[104]

20

Although occurrences are rare, some cases suggest that fish oil interacts with anticoagulants like

warfarin/Coumadin and antiplatelet medications like aspirin that can increase the risk of bleeding when

used together.[105][106][107]. Taking fish oil alone does not appear to have this risk.[108][109] Consult with a medical

caregiver or prescriber before taking fish oil with any of these medications.

There is some evidence of that fish oil increases the risk of atrial fibrillation, as detailed by Examine. The

risk seems to be present even at fish oil doses as low as 1 gram. There are still many uncertainties

(including the magnitude of risk) as to whether or not this risk is present in people without cardiovascular

disease or who are not at a high risk of cardiovascular disease.

 Digging Deeper: Oxidized fish oil

Fish oil can become rancid and oxidize when exposed to oxygen, heat, or light. These types of oil are

particularly susceptible to oxidation because of their very-long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids.

The oxidation level is measured using three values:

1.  Peroxide value (PV)

2.  Anisidine value (AV)

3.  Total oxidation value (TOTOX)

PV is a measure of primary oxidation products (peroxides), and AV is a measure of secondary

oxidation (aldehydes and ketones). The TOTOX value is calculated using the formula AV + 2PV. The

lower the TOTOX value, the better the oil quality will be. The Global Organization for EPA and DHA

Omega-3 recommends a TOTOX value of no more than 26.

Oxidation of fish oils may be more common than many suspect. One 2015 study found that nearly

50% of commercial fish oils exceeded the maximum recommended TOTOX value,[110] whereas others

found good compliance with TOTOX limits.[111][112] Taken together, these divergent results demonstrate

just how widely the quality of commercially available fish oil supplements can vary.

Evidence for the health effects of consuming oxidized fish oils is a bit mixed. For healthy individuals,

there is a lack of obvious short-term health damage from consuming oxidized fish oil. One study

showed no difference in circulating levels of oxidized LDL or inflammatory markers after 7 weeks of

supplementation with oxidized fish oil.[113]

However, in participants with high levels of cholesterol and triglycerides, consumption of highly

oxidized fish oils can minimize its efficiency in improving metabolic markers such as fasting glucose,

total cholesterol, and triglycerides.[114]

21

Promising Supplements

Chondroitin and Glucosamine

Why has there been so much interest in
chondroitin and glucosamine?

Chondroitin and glucosamine are basic components of cartilage and synovial fluid and are popular

supplements for osteoarthritis due to the possibility that they could help to repair cartilage and balance the

ratio between catabolism and anabolism in osteoarthritic cartilage.[115][116]

In addition to a direct structural role, these components also have anti-inflammatory effects, which could

reduce the progression of osteoarthritis and relieve symptoms.

Chondroitin’s anti-inflammatory effects might occur through inhibition of the protein complex NF-κB, which

regulates inflammatory responses.[117]

Putative inflammatory interplay between the synovium and cartilage

Adapted from Lovu et al. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2008.[117]

Glucosamine may reduce COX-2 activity and the subsequent inflammatory response.[118]

22

Glucosamine’s cartilage-preserving effects

What makes chondroitin a promising
supplement

A meta-analysis of randomized double-blind trials that tested the effects of chondroitin sulfate on

osteoarthritis pain and structural changes found a small but statistically significant reduction in pain.[119] This

reduction wasn’t affected by limiting the analysis to studies without industry involvement (industry

involvement has been a frequent concern with chondroitin research). The effect was smaller but still

statistically significant when only considering studies with high methodological quality. A small but

statistically significant reduction in joint-space narrowing was found overall but was considerably

diminished when factoring in industry involvement and was no longer statistically significant when

considering only high-quality studies. However, these two subgroup analyses involved far fewer studies

than for pain.

Another meta-analysis of 18 randomized controlled trials found a moderate and statistically significant

reduction in pain and a small improvement in physical function.[120] These effects on pain and physical

function were lower in the longest studies. Studies at a low risk of bias also had considerably smaller effect

sizes than studies with a high risk of bias, though the effect was still statistically significant when

considering only low-risk studies.

Another meta-analysis that considered only randomized trials that lasted 6 months or longer didn’t find a

meaningful effect on pain or function overall, although it found a small, statistically significant effect for

pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin.[121] Another meta-analysis of randomized trials lasting 12 months or

longer found a small but statistically significant effect on joint space/cartilage volume but no clear evidence

for a benefit to pain or function.[122]

In summary, chondroitin is unlikely to have a meaningful effect on pain and physical function in the long

term. However, it might reduce the rate of cartilage degradation, though research is still insufficient on that

topic, and more high-quality studies are needed.

23

 
Warnings about chondroitin

Oral supplementation with chondroitin is relatively safe, and it hasn’t been known to increase overall

adverse events relative to placebo in trials on osteoarthritis.[123] Some adverse events including

musculoskeletal problems, connective tissue problems, skin problems, headaches, and a variety of

gastrointestinal symptoms have been reported.[124][125][126] However, it isn’t clear that these adverse events are

particularly caused by chondroitin.

Chondroitin and glucosamine may have anticoagulant properties, which could be a problem for people

taking blood thinners, such as antiplatelet agents (e.g., aspirin) or anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin/Coumadin

and acenocoumarol/Sintrom).[127][128]

It is possible that people with shellfish allergies could experience reactions from chondroitin, though this

may be due to combinations that include glucosamine, which is often produced from the shells of

shellfish.[129]

How to take chondroitin

Take 600–1,200 mg of chondroitin sulfate per day, with food. Within this range, higher doses may be more

effective.

Talk to a physician to find out whether pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin is a viable treatment option for a

particular circumstance because this type of chondroitin may be more effective.

In the short-term (less than 3 months), people taking chondroitin may see a change in pain of −0.59 to

−0.22 standard deviations. It is unclear whether chondroitin can offer consistent long-term reductions in

pain.

There may be a reduction in joint space narrowing of −0.61 to 0.00 standard deviations over the course of

12 months.

What makes glucosamine a promising option

A meta-analysis of 17 randomized double-blind trials on glucosamine sulfate found a small but statistically

significant reduction in pain.[130] When the 6 studies with industry involvement were excluded, the effect was

even smaller — not what would be considered clinically significant on its own, but if genuine, it could be a

potentially good addition to a supplement combination; the same held true for comparison of studies with

low and high methodological quality and in the case of joint space as well.

Another meta-analysis restricted the included studies to those lasting 6 months or longer and found a

general lack of effect on pain and physical function, although it did find a small, statistically significant

effect for prescription crystalline glucosamine, based on a small number of studies.[121] Yet another meta-

analysis included studies that assessed joint space width or cartilage volume over the course of 12 months

or longer and found a small and not statistically significant effect.[122]

The effect of glucosamine on pain is small, and the methodological shortcomings of some of the studies

limit confidence in the small effect. The effect isn’t large enough to warrant confidence that glucosamine

24

 
will have a meaningful effect on pain in the long-term, though there is a possibility that it could reduce the

degradation of joints. However, this possibility is also questionable but can’t be ruled out.

Warnings about glucosamine

Oral supplementation with glucosamine is relatively safe, and it hasn’t been known to increase overall

adverse events relative to placebo in trials on osteoarthritis, except for a possible increase in

musculoskeletal adverse events (though this is based on insufficient evidence to be confident in it[123]).

Individual studies have found a somewhat higher rate of respiratory tract adverse events, arthralgia, and

gastrointestinal adverse events.[131][132][133][56] However, these observations haven’t been corroborated by other

studies and could easily be due to chance.

Some studies suggest that glucosamine sulfate supplements may have a negative effect on glucose

metabolism. This effect may confirm observations from in vitro and rodent studies that revealed that

glucosamine inhibits beta-cell glucokinase activity and thus induces a metabolic state similar to non-insulin-

dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).[134] More recently, glucosamine has mostly been cleared of being a

prodiabetic agent in most practical cases, with the putative exception of individuals with untreated

diabetes or glucose intolerance.[135] Systematic reviews, on the other hand, show no general ill effect of

glucosamine supplements on glycemia in healthy individuals and highlight that there is insufficient evidence

of prodiabetic effects in individuals with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes.[136][137]

Glucosamine and chondroitin may have anticoagulant properties, which could be a problem for people

taking blood thinners such as antiplatelet agents (e.g., aspirin) or anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin/Coumadin

and acenocoumarol/Sintrom).[127][128]

It is possible that people with shellfish allergies could experience reactions from glucosamine because it is

commonly produced from the shells of shellfish.[129]

How to take glucosamine

Take 1.5 grams of crystalline glucosamine sulfate (a stabilized form of glucosamine sulfate).

Glucosamine sulfate sodium chloride is the best-studied form of crystalline glucosamine sulfate, but

preliminary evidence suggests that glucosamine sulfate potassium chloride may be equally efficacious.

Studies do not support the use of other types of glucosamine sulfate. Studies do not support the use of

glucosamine hydrochloride.

People who take glucosamine may see a change in pain of −0.54 to −0.16 standard deviations. It is unclear

whether glucosamine can offer consistent long-term reductions in pain.

Glucosamine may lead to a change in joint-space narrowing of −0.23 to +0.04 standard deviations over the

course of 4–5 months.

Glucosamine + Chondroitin

A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials on the combination of glucosamine and chondroitin found a

lack of effect on pain, physical function, or stiffness when the combination was compared to a placebo,

based on a small number of studies.[123] Another meta-analysis on randomized trials lasting 6 months or

25

longer failed to find a meaningful effect of glucosamine + chondroitin on pain, function, or joint space

narrowing, also based on a small number of studies.[121] The reason for why the combination is said to be

ineffective here — compared to reports of efficacy in the previous sections — is that the individual

supplements have a small short-term effect, likely due to the different characteristics of the different

studies.

Warnings about glucosamine + chondroitin

Individual warnings about glucosamine or chondroitin from the previous sections apply to their

combination. Additionally, when used in trials, the combination of glucosamine and chondroitin appears to

carry a greater risk for gastrointestinal, central nervous system, musculoskeletal, infection-related, and

other adverse events. However, this caution is based on too little research to comfortably rule out random

chance, and we aren’t very confident in the findings. It would make sense that taking both could amplify the

risk of adverse events though, so caution should be taken. Using lower doses for each component than one

would take individually could be prudent.

MSM

What makes MSM a promising option

Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is an organosulfur compound that has the potential to control chronic

inflammation, which makes it a plausible candidate for osteoarthritis treatment.[138][139] Furthermore, it seems

to have glutathione-maintaining properties and can reduce lipid and protein oxidation, which may give it

additional protective effects.[140]

Four randomized double-blind studies on osteoarthritis have been conducted, each lasting 12 weeks; the

results showed general improvements in pain, physical function, and overall symptom scores when

measured.[133][141][142][143] Although this evidence is promising, the main reservation with MSM is the lack of

research compared with other supplements. The size and consistency of effects for the average person

with osteoarthritis are still unclear, and it’s also unclear whether MSM has any unique effects that would

warrant inclusion in a supplement stack.

The effects on pain related to exercise are unclear and the small amount of research available so far is

negative.[144][145]

Warnings About MSM

MSM appears to be highly safe, and the studies that evaluated adverse events failed to find a meaningful

safety difference between it and placebo. One study found a slightly higher incidence of bloating and

insomnia compared with placebo; however, this finding is unreliable and could easily be due to chance.[141] In

one study, a basic blood test failed to find differences for various safety biomarkers compared with

placebo.[146]

More studies on the long-term use of MSM are needed to declare it to be truly safe, but there appears to

be little risk in the short-term.

26

 
How to take MSM

The study with the greatest effect used 1,125 mg three times a day (i.e., 3,375 mg/day). There is no proven

benefit to taking more than 6 grams per day, and the optimal and sufficient doses are generally unclear.

MSM has been tested with Boswellia serrata, with glucosamine, and with a combination of glucosamine and

chondroitin. In each case, the addition of MSM seems to confer a slight benefit, but further research is

needed for confirmation.

An estimation of MSM’s effect size isn’t possible at this time.

Pycnogenol

What makes Pycnogenol a promising option

Procyanidins are flavonoids that may improve blood flow and reduce inflammation. Pycnogenol is a

patented extract made from the bark of the French maritime pine (Pinus pinaster Aiton) that is standardized

to contain 65%–75% procyanidins. To date, 3 trials investigating the role of Pycnogenol in the management

of osteoarthritis have been published.[147][148][149] All trials were double blinded, randomized, and placebo

controlled and looked at the effects of supplementation with 100 or 150 milligrams of Pycnogenol for three

months on osteoarthritic symptoms (knee pain, knee stiffness, and physical function) in men and women

with mild osteoarthritis (Grade 1 or 2).

Overall, the aforementioned trials reported positive effects of Pycnogenol supplementation on knee pain,

knee stiffness, and physical function, with moderate to large effect size. That said, the available trials are

few and are of unclear or high risk of bias. Moreover, at least 2 of the trials were funded by the

manufacturers and patent owners of Pycnogenol. As such, although promising, the available evidence

should be considered preliminary.

Grape seed extract is rich in procyanidins and lower in cost than pine bark extracts, but its benefits on joint

health have never been directly demonstrated.

Warnings about Pycnogenol

Reported side effects from pycnogenol use are rare but include gastrointestinal discomfort, nausea,

headache, and dizziness.[150] Taking pycnogenol with food could decrease your chances of having adverse

GI effects.[151]

Taking a pine bark extract with other hypotensive agents could cause low blood pressure. Hypotensive

agents can be pharmaceuticals as well as supplements (notably garlic) but also nitrates, cocoa, or grape

seed extracts, to mention only the supplements presented in this guide.

How to take Pycnogenol

27

 
To supplement with Pycnogenol, take 50 milligrams 2–3 times per day with meals, for a total daily dose of

100–150 milligrams.

The maximum benefit is usually experienced after 2–3 months of continuous supplementation.

Judging from a study on a grape seed extract, the improvement in blood flow from pine bark extracts

might be negated by the flavonoid quercetin, so concurrent supplementation should therefore be avoided.

An estimation of pycnogenol’s effect size isn’t possible at this time.

Saffron

What makes saffron a promising option

The term "saffron" refers to both the perennial stemless herb Crocus sativus that is primarily cultivated in

Iran, Spain, India, and Greece and to the deeply orange aromatic spice that is derived from the dried

stigmas in the blue-purple flowers of the crocus plant. This fine powder is best known for its unique flavor

and is one of the most expensive culinary spices on the market. Saffron contains more than 150 different

antioxidant compounds, which are also thought to contribute to its supposed medicinal benefits.[152]

Both regular saffron powders and crude aqueous/ethanolic extracts, as well as specific extracts containing

primarily one or a specific mixture of saffron's purportedly pharmacologically active carotenoids (i.e.

crocetin, crocin, or safranal), have been found to reduce oxidative stress and inflammation in vitro and in

vivo. Many of the pertinent studies were conducted in rodent models. The corresponding studies reported

preventative effects on ulcers, general improvements in digestion, and benefits in cancer treatment and

prevention, heart and metabolic health, and glucose metabolism, as well as antidepressant, anxiolytic, and

hypnotic effects.[153] In addition, there is some evidence to suggest that the anti-inflammatory effects of

saffron extracts, and particularly those of crocin, can ameliorate arthritic pain [152]. Currently, there are only

2 human studies to support a pain-reducing effect in arthritis. A 12-week double-blind randomized

controlled trial conducted at the Iran University of Medical Sciences found significant improvements[154]

using the validated arthritis-specific 28-item disease activity score (DAS28).[155][156] The DAS28 ratings range

from ≤ 2.5 (indicating remission) to ≤3.2, ≤ 5.1, and >5.1 for low, medium, and high disease activity,

respectively. The ratings are based on objectively measurable signs of inflammation such as swelling or

redness, as well as markers of self-reported pain intensity. In the first study, significant reductions in DAS28

score (−0.75) from high-medium to low-medium disease activity and significantly lower CRP values were

observed in response to 100 mg of saffron powder per day taken by 61 women (average age of 53) with

rheumatoid arthritis (RA).[157] In the second study, [158] which was also conducted by Iranian researchers, 40

participants (ages 40–70) with medically diagnosed osteoarthritis (67% women, 33% men), the participants

received one capsule per day for 4 months of a commercial Iranian saffron extract (Krocina™; the authors

declared "no conflict of interest") standardized for 15 mg of crocin with generally similar self-reported

outcomes that were quantified on a simple visual analogue scale from 0 to 10 (preintervention: 7.83,

postintervention: 2.27), and improvements were also observed in the placebo group (preintervention: 8,

postintervention: 6.7). Thus the efficacy of the supplement remains questionable.

Warnings about saffron

A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials on saffron and depression found a potential modest

increase in headaches, anxiety, tremors, heart palpitations, sweating, nausea, vomiting, increased appetite,

28

and other gastrointestinal complaints; however, none of these increases reached statistical significance, and

the average expected incidence remains unclear.[159] Another meta-analysis reported a lack of severe

adverse events.[160] In one study, 26 weeks of supplementation with 60 mg of saffron extract in men was

associated with reductions in red and white blood cell counts and in platelets, along with a drop in systolic

and diastolic blood pressure of 10.8%–11.7% and complaints of sedation, hypomania, and changes in

appetite, which started to occur after 8 weeks of exposure and increased in magnitude as the study

continued.[161] One review paper suggested that the side effects of dosages below 1.5 g/day are rare, though

there are some reports of 1.2 to 2 grams possibly causing vomiting, diarrhea, and bleeding. [152]. In their

review, Schmidt et al. reported potentially abortive effects of >10 grams of saffron powder in pregnant

women, though this report dates back to 1925 and could be the result of the presence of unwanted

pollutants in the formulation. Saffron likely reduces blood sugar, and in combination with diabetes

medication, it could possibly lead to hypoglycemia. Saffron may also reduce blood pressure, and in

combination with hypertension medication, it could possibly lead to low blood pressure. Natural chemicals

in saffron can interfere with the activity of cytochrome P450 enzymes, which could either reduce or

increase the rate of metabolism for various drugs, potentially leading to negative interactions.[162]

How to take saffron

Daily dosages of 100 mg/day of regular saffron and extracts containing 10–20 mg/day of active ingredients

have been found to be efficient (regardless of timing), not only for arthritic pain and inflammation but also

as natural antidepressants, with a potency similar to that of well-established antidepressant drugs [163][164]. An

estimation of saffron’s effect size isn’t possible at this time.

Vitamin C

What makes vitamin C a promising option

Vitamin C is necessary for collagen formation, so having low levels of vitamin C can be detrimental to joint

health. However, in people whose levels are normal, supplemental vitamin C has little effect on joint

disorders, with one exception: it can help prevent complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), a painful

chronic condition characterized by swollen joints and by changes in skin quality] and hair quality). CRPS

can be caused by orthopedic surgery or a joint injury.

Warnings about vitamin C

Vitamin C can potentially cause diarrhea, nausea, and stomach cramps. Taking vitamin C can cause dental

erosion.[165] Logically, the risk is probably more likely with powders taken in liquid or chewable tablets, and a

fully encapsulated vitamin C supplement would likely not have this effect. Supplemental doses of vitamin C

may reduce some of the cellular adaptations to exercise, namely, mitochondrial biogenesis and endogenous

antioxidant synthesis.[166][167] It is unclear how long this effect persists after dosing, so it may be best to leave

as much time as possible between vitamin C supplementation and exercise. Vitamin C likely reduces blood

sugar, and in combination with diabetes medication, it could possibly lead to hypoglycemia. Very high

doses of vitamin C may sometimes damage the kidneys by being metabolized into oxalate,[168] and this may

29

 
lead to renal failure in rare cases.[169][170][171] The lowest dose needed to see a concerning rise in urinary

oxalate is 1 g/day. Vitamin C may also reduce blood pressure, and in combination with hypertension

medication, it could possibly lead to low blood pressure Vitamin C may reduce the effectiveness of some

HIV medications. Moreover, because it can increase the absorption of iron and aluminum, it should not be

taken within several hours of taking aluminum-based antacids (e.g., Amphojel, AlternaGEL, Alu-Cap, Alu-

Tab, Dialume).

How to take vitamin C

People at risk of CRPS can take 500 mg of vitamin C once per day, ideally in the morning.

People with joint pain not associated with CRPS can also take 500 mg of vitamin C once per day, but if the

pain has not lessened after 2 months, supplementation need not be continued.

Further research is needed to determine whether vitamin C is better absorbed with food.

The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) of vitamin C for adults ranges from 75 to 120 mg per day.[172]

Although the 500 mg/day dosage discussed here exceeds the RDA, it is still well under vitamin C’s

Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) of 2,000 mg/day.

Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for vitamin C (mg)

AGE

MALE

FEMALE

PREGNANT

LACTATING

0–12 months

1–3 years

4–8 years

9–13 years

14–18 years

>18 years

*

400

650

1,200

1,800

2,000

*

400

650

1,200

1,800

2,000

—

—

—

—

1,800

2,000

—

—

—

—

1,800

2,000

* Formula and food should be the only sources of vitamin C for infants.

Reference: Institute of Medicine. Vitamin C (chapter 5 in Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and

Carotenoids. The National Academies Press. 2000. DOI:10.17226/9810)

30

Unproven Supplements

CBD (cannabidiol)

What makes CBD an unproven

CBD (cannabidiol) is the second most abundant cannabinoid in cannabis, after THC

(tetrahydrocannabinol).[173] Isolated CBD is typically used medicinally, not recreationally, and the four most

commonly targeted conditions are pain, anxiety, depression, and sleep disorders.[174]

The Arthritis Foundation is an advocacy group based in the United States. One of their aims is to provide

evidence-based resources for people with arthritis. A recent survey that they conducted found that 30% of

the respondents used CBD, and close to 80% were considering using it or have used it previously.

The large and growing interest in CBD prompted The Arthritis Foundation to release a set of expert-

reviewed guidelines for people with arthritis who are interested in using CBD. The key takeaways are

summarized below. Another review by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine also

found that studies on CBD and arthritis were very limited at the moment.[175]

Cissus quadrangularis

What makes Cissus quadrangularis an
unproven option

As used in traditional medicine in both Asia and parts of Africa for centuries, the stems and leaves of Cissus

quadrangularis L. (aka Cissus) have more recently attracted scientists' attention as an anti-inflammatory

medicinal compound. Its historically well-documented effects are ascribed to Cissus' relatively high content

of antioxidants like vitamin C and beta-carotene and various ketosteroids, flavonoids, and phytosterols.

There is no good evidence to support the claims about Cissus' effects on joint health. In fact, there is only

one publication that appropriately reported both methods and outcomes of a pilot study that was

specifically designed to test its antiarthritic effects [176]. The study was at best of exploratory nature, had no

placebo control (not even a “no treatment” control), recruited only 29 participants, and had no

preregistration of the experimental protocol, no objectively measurable primary outcomes, no a priori (or

ex post) power calculation, as well as a dubious potential influence of "partial" industry funding. All these

shortcomings undermine confidence in the allegedly “promising” results that were reported, namely, a

significant improvement in the McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) index, [177] a common,

repeatedly validated composite index of symptoms and physical function in people with OA of the knee

and the hip, and the subjective workout-related pain ratings that the researchers collected before and after

an 8-week intervention using 3 grams per day of Cissus quadrangularis given in capsule form. The other

paper that specifically addressed the use of Cissus for joint health was also a non-(placebo-)controlled,

31

 
 
nonpreregistered study.[178] In the study, the authors recruited 60 Indian participants (31–70 years) with

obesity and a diagnosis of osteoporosis or bone spurs (osteophytic changes). The participants were

assigned to one of three treatments: 5 grams twice daily of Cissus quadrangularis, 5 grams twice daily of

Zingiber officinale (commonly known as "ginger"), or a combination treatment with both. The total study

duration was not properly reported, but with questionnaires handed out at three 15-day intervals, it seems

logical to assume that it took 45 days for the subjective improvements in joint swelling (from “moderate” to

“normal”) and tenderness (from “mild” to “normal”) to manifest. Due to the use of an unvalidated

questionnaire and a rather dubious pain scale ranging from 0 = normal to 3 = severe, the results must be

taken with caution. In the absence of control and/or placebo groups in both of the relevant studies, it is

clear that Cissus quadrangularis must be considered as "unproven" with respect to its putatively beneficial

effects on joint health.

Key takeaways from The Arthritis Foundation’s CBD guidelines

Reference: Arthritis.org

32

Inadvisable Supplements

Thunder God Vine

What makes thunder god vine an inadvisable
supplement

 Caution: This supplement has the potential to harm your health

Please read the following section carefully. The available evidence indicates that this supplement

may have harmful effects. It should not be added to your supplement regimen.

Thunder god vine (Tripterygium wilfordii) is used in Traditional Chinese Medicine to treat a wide range of

conditions. By decreasing the number of white blood cells, it reduces inflammation (and thus pain) around

the joints, but it also makes the body more susceptible to infection, which can lead to sickness and

potentially death.

Although Tripterygium wilfordii appears to be effective in treating rheumatoid arthritis, it is not safe and

should not be supplemented.

33

 
Adverse effects of thunder god vine

Much research has been conducted on Tripterygium wilfordii glycosides for rheumatoid arthritis, and it has

been summarized in a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials that investigated at the efficacy of

Tripterygium wilfordii for rheumatoid arthritis.[179] Overall, 40 studies involving 3,092 participants were

included, and a considerable reduction in morning stiffness, tender joints, swollen joints, and overall

symptoms was found. A significant reduction in inflammation was identified, thus confirming its anti-

inflammatory effects.

Although it’s quite likely that Tripterygium wilfordii is effective, larger studies tended to find smaller (though

still meaningful) effects. Although the authors didn’t find evidence of publication bias and found that the

average study was of fairly high quality by conventional standards, it’s possible that the research still

suffers from considerable bias, and future papers with more nuanced analyses based on study quality

would be useful.

34

FAQ

Q. What about the supplements not covered in
this guide?

Our guides are regularly updated, often with new supplements. We prioritize assessing (and reassessing)

the most popular of them and those most likely to work. However, if there is a specific supplement you’d

like to see covered in a future update, please let us know by filling out this survey.

Q. Can I add a supplement not covered in this
guide to my combo?

Supplement with your current combo for a few weeks before attempting any change. Talk to your physician

and research each potential addition. Check for known negative interactions with other supplements and

pharmaceuticals in your current combo, but also for synergies. If two supplements are synergistic or

additive in their effects, you might want to use lower doses of each.

Q. Can I modify the recommended doses?

If a supplement has a recommended dose range, stay within that range. If a supplement has a precise

recommended dose, stay within 10% of that dose. Taking more than recommended could be

counterproductive or even dangerous. Taking less could render the supplement ineffective, yet starting with

half the regular dose could be prudent — especially if you know you tend to react strongly to supplements

or pharmaceuticals.

Q. At what time should I take my supplements?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Starting with half the regular dose can help

minimize the harm a supplement may cause when taken during the day (e.g., fatigue) or in the evening (e.g.,

insomnia).

Q. Should I take my supplements with or
without food?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Besides, a supplement’s digestion, absorption,

and metabolism can be affected differently by different foods. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), for

instance, are better absorbed with a small meal containing fat than with a large meal containing little to no

fat.

35

 
Q. What are DRI, RDA, AI, and UL?

The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) is a system of nutrition recommendations designed by the Institute of

Medicine (a US institution now known as the Health and Medicine Division). RDA, AI, and UL are part of this

system.

Contrary to what the name suggests, a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) doesn’t represent

an ideal amount; it represents the minimum you need in order to avoid deficiency-related health

issues. More precisely, it represents an amount just large enough to meet the minimum requirements

of 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages — which implies that the RDA is too low for

2.5% of healthy people.

The Adequate Intake (AI) is like the RDA, except that the number is more uncertain.

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the maximum safe amount. More precisely, it is the

maximum daily amount deemed to be safe for 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages —

which implies that the UL is too high for 2.5% of healthy people.

As a general rule, a healthy diet should include at least the RDA of each nutrient — but less than this

nutrient’s UL. This rule has many exceptions, though. For instance, people who sweat more need more salt

(i.e., sodium), whereas people who take metformin (a diabetes medicine) need more vitamin B12.

Moreover, the DRIs are based on the median weight of adults and children in the United States. Everything

else being equal (notably age, sex, and percentage of body fat), you likely need a lesser amount of

nutrients if you weigh less, and vice versa if you weigh more. The numbers, however, are not proportional

— if only because the brains of two people of very different weights have very similar needs. So you can’t

just double your RDIs for each nutrient if you weigh twice as much as the median adult of your age and sex

(even if we overlook that people weighing the same can differ in many respects, notably body fat).

Q. What's the difference between osteoarthritis
and rheumatoid arthritis?

Osteoarthritis is caused by a progressive loss of cartilage that leads to joint inflammation via bone-on-bone

rubbing, whereas rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune inflammatory disease that targets and degrades

joint tissue.

Q. What are the risk factors for osteoarthritis?

Distinct risk factors for osteoarthritis, summarized below, include genetic susceptibility, morphological

variations in bones and joints, traumatic joint injury, excessive joint stress, aging, and obesity.[180] Obesity is

a major risk factor for osteoarthritis of the knee,[181] and weight loss can lead to improvements in the

condition,[182] though more long-term studies are warranted.

Exercise can be useful for reducing pain and improving joint function,[183][184] though exercising with sore

joints can be difficult, and not all forms of exercise are suitable for every patient.[185]

Pharmaceutically, treatment mostly revolves around the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs).

While effective in reducing pain,[186] these drugs aren’t without their adverse effects, which can include an

36

increased risk of stroke and heart attack.[187][188]

Osteoarthritis risk factors

Reference: Allen and Golightly. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015.[180]

Q. Will supplementing or consuming turmeric
yield the same benefits as curcumin
supplementation?

Curcumin is the active ingredient in turmeric that yields many of the benefits currently seen, but both are

poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and usually require some enhancement to increase

bioavailability.[189] Typically, a compound found in black pepper, known as piperine, is supplemented

alongside curcumin to increase this bioavailability.[190] Other products increase bioavailability by using

specialized formulations, such as the use of nanotechnology or a blend of essential oils.

It is unlikely, though, that simply consuming turmeric in small amounts through the diet will yield the same

benefits as supplementing large doses of curcumin, due to the small dosage and poor bioavailability. It is

also worth noting that turmeric has been found in some studies to be contaminated with heavy metals like

lead.[191]

Q. What about essential nutrients? I don’t see
many in this guide.

It’s plausible that some essential nutrients would be relevant to osteoarthritis, but evidence is sparse.

Calcium fructoborate, a form of boron, has shown potent reductions in circulating inflammatory cytokines

associated with osteoarthritis in a handful of small trials,[192] and in osteoarthritis patients.[193] Although its

impact on osteoarthritis-specific endpoints has yet to be studied in humans, at least one study in dogs

37

suggests an improvement in physical function.[194]

Vitamin K is also plausible[195], but not well-studied. It would be beneficial to see studies of common nutrient

deficiencies in osteoarthritis and more trials on plausible supplements in the future, though there isn’t very

much information at present.

Q. Will using CBD alone increase my appetite?

In short, probably not. THC, one of cannabis's main active ingredients, is primarily responsible for the

appetite-stimulating effects of cannabis. THC can interact with receptors in the body that can, in turn,

increase appetite. The method of consumption can affect how THC influences food choice and overall food

intake, as can the amount and nature of the products consumed concurrently.

However, some products labeled “CBD only” or “0 THC” may still have high enough amounts of THC to

cause an effect. Be conscious of who your source is if you chose to use CBD products.

How cannabis increases appetite

References: Cota et al. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2003.[196] ● Patel and Cone. Nature. 2015.[197]

Q. What can I do to help prevent my fish oils
from oxidizing?

38

Since fish oil is primarily polyunsaturated fat, it is prone to becoming rancid and oxidizing. Oxidation largely

depends on exposure to heat, light, and oxygen. The addition of antioxidants to the final product can

reduce the rate of oxidation during storage. Vitamin E is typically used, but there’s a lot of research on

other antioxidants like carnosic acid suggesting they might be superior.[198]

Part of the responsibility for ensuring fish oil remains unoxidized is on the buyer. Exposure of fish oil to

light, heat, and oxygen accelerates the oxidation of the oil, with the magnitude of damage depending on

the length and degree of exposure. Once you buy the supplement, it is prudent to store it in a cool place

away from light, such as the fridge.

If you buy oil in a bottle, the bottle should be tinted to prevent light from getting through and small enough

that you can work through it in a month or two. After all, oxygen gets in the bottle every time you open it.

Some fish oil bottles come with a pump, which can help reduce oxygen exposure. Buying capsules instead

of bottles can also help prevent oxidation.

Q. How do NSAIDs provide pain relief?

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used to relieve pain or a fever. Common

forms include aspirin (Advil), ibuprofen (Motrin), and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn) but they all work through

a similar mechanism: they block an enzyme called cyclooxygenase (COX).[199] But there’s a twist! This

enzyme comes in two major forms: COX-1 and COX-2.

COX-1 is involved in the production of prostaglandins, which perform many functions in the body, including
maintaining good kidney function and producing the protective layer of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.

COX-2 produces molecules responsible for pain and inflammation, so that’s the one to target if you want to reduce
these effects.

Most NSAIDs nonselectively target both COXs, which explains their infamous GI adverse effects. However,

the NSAID celecoxib (Celebrex) binds more to COX-2 than COX-1, so it can target pain and inflammation

with fewer adverse effects, at least in theory. In reality, the advantages of celecoxib are not so clear-cut. A

recent review found that the relative harm and benefit of celecoxib for people with osteoarthritis are hard

to assess, partially because of the general scarcity and possible bias of evidence due to industry

involvement.[200]

39

 
References

1.   Mifflin KA, Kerr BJ The transition from acute to chronic pain: understanding how different biological systems interact. Can J

Anaesth. (2014 Feb)

2.   Kaeding C, Best TM Tendinosis: pathophysiology and nonoperative treatment. Sports Health. (2009 Jul)

3.   Siemieniuk RAC, Harris IA, Agoritsas T, Poolman RW, Brignardello-Petersen R, Van de Velde S, Buchbinder R, Englund M,

Lytvyn L, Quinlan C, Helsingen L, Knutsen G, Olsen NR, Macdonald H, Hailey L, Wilson HM, Lydiatt A, Kristiansen A Arthroscopic
surgery for degenerative knee arthritis and meniscal tears: a clinical practice guideline. Br J Sports Med. (2018 Mar)

4.   Queiroz LP Worldwide epidemiology of fibromyalgia. Curr Pain Headache Rep. (2013 Aug)

5.   Politei J, Remondino G, Heguilen R, Wallace E, Durand C, Schenone A When arthralgia is not arthritis. Eur J Rheumatol. (2016

Dec)

6.   Woolf CJ Central sensitization: implications for the diagnosis and treatment of pain. Pain. (2011 Mar)

7.   Joshi SK, Honore P Animal models of pain for drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov. (2006 Sep)

8.   Wang CK, Myunghae Hah J, Carroll I Factors contributing to pain chronicity. Curr Pain Headache Rep. (2009 Feb)

9.   Hsu CJ, Meierbachtol A, George SZ, Chmielewski TL Fear of Reinjury in Athletes. Sports Health. (2017 Mar/Apr)

10.   Blay SL, Andreoli SB, Gastal FL Chronic painful physical conditions, disturbed sleep and psychiatric morbidity: results from an

elderly survey. Ann Clin Psychiatry. (2007 Jul-Sep)

11.   Sasaki E, Tsuda E, Yamamoto Y, Maeda S, Inoue R, Chiba D, Okubo N, Takahashi I, Nakaji S, Ishibashi Y Nocturnal knee pain
increases with the severity of knee osteoarthritis, disturbing patient sleep quality. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). (2014 Jul)

12.   Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Carrillo C, Sadeghi N, Fitzgerald JD, Ranganath VK, Nicassio PM Sleep loss exacerbates fatigue,

depression, and pain in rheumatoid arthritis. Sleep. (2012 Apr 1)

13.   Apkarian AV, Baliki MN, Geha PY Towards a theory of chronic pain. Prog Neurobiol. (2009 Feb)

14.   Chevalier G, Sinatra ST, Oschman JL, Sokal K, Sokal P Earthing: health implications of reconnecting the human body to the

Earth's surface electrons. J Environ Public Health. (2012)

15.   Walch JM, Rabin BS, Day R, Williams JN, Choi K, Kang JD The effect of sunlight on postoperative analgesic medication use: a

prospective study of patients undergoing spinal surgery. Psychosom Med. (2005 Jan-Feb)

16.   Taylor SL, Kaur M, LoSicco K, Willard J, Camacho F, O'Rourke KS, Feldman SR Pilot study of the effect of ultraviolet light on

pain and mood in fibromyalgia syndrome. J Altern Complement Med. (2009 Jan)

17.   Messier SP, Gutekunst DJ, Davis C, DeVita P Weight loss reduces knee-joint loads in overweight and obese older adults with

knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. (2005 Jul)

18.   Apkarian AV, Bushnell MC, Treede RD, Zubieta JK Human brain mechanisms of pain perception and regulation in health and

disease. Eur J Pain. (2005 Aug)

19.   la Cour P, Petersen M Effects of mindfulness meditation on chronic pain: a randomized controlled trial. Pain Med. (2015 Apr)

20.   Zamani B, Golkar HR, Farshbaf S, Emadi-Baygi M, Tajabadi-Ebrahimi M, Jafari P, Akhavan R, Taghizadeh M, Memarzadeh MR,
Asemi Z Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic supplementation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Int J Rheum Dis. (2016 Sep)

21.   Brown K, DeCoffe D, Molcan E, Gibson DL Diet-induced dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota and the effects on immunity and

disease. Nutrients. (2012 Aug)

22.   Spreadbury I Comparison with ancestral diets suggests dense acellular carbohydrates promote an inflammatory microbiota,

and may be the primary dietary cause of leptin resistance and obesity. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. (2012)

23.   Sailer ER, Subramanian LR, Rall B, Hoernlein RF, Ammon HP, Safayhi H Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid (AKBA): structure

requirements for binding and 5-lipoxygenase inhibitory activity.. Br J Pharmacol. (1996-Feb)

24.   Safayhi H, Mack T, Sabieraj J, Anazodo MI, Subramanian LR, Ammon HP Boswellic acids: novel, specific, nonredox inhibitors of

5-lipoxygenase.. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. (1992-Jun)

25.   Yu G, Xiang W, Zhang T, Zeng L, Yang K, Li J Effectiveness of Boswellia and Boswellia extract for osteoarthritis patients: a

systematic review and meta-analysis.. BMC Complement Med Ther. (2020-Jul-17)

26.   Majeed M, Majeed S, Narayanan NK, Nagabhushanam K A pilot, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to assess

the safety and efficacy of a novel Boswellia serrata extract in the management of osteoarthritis of the knee.. Phytother Res.
(2019-May)

27.   Sontakke S, et al Open, randomized, controlled clinical trial of Boswellia serrata extract as compared to valdecoxib in

osteoarthritis of knee. Indian J Pharmacol. (2007 Oct)

28.   Kimmatkar N, Thawani V, Hingorani L, Khiyani R Efficacy and tolerability of Boswellia serrata extract in treatment of

osteoarthritis of knee--a randomized double blind placebo controlled trial.. Phytomedicine. (2003-Jan)

29.   Sengupta K, Kolla JN, Krishnaraju AV, Yalamanchili N, Rao CV, Golakoti T, Raychaudhuri S, Raychaudhuri SP Cellular and

40

molecular mechanisms of anti-inflammatory effect of Aflapin: a novel Boswellia serrata extract.. Mol Cell Biochem. (2011-Aug)

30.   Ernst E Frankincense: systematic review.. BMJ. (2008-Dec-17)

31.   Sengupta K, Alluri KV, Satish AR, Mishra S, Golakoti T, Sarma KV, Dey D, Raychaudhuri SP A double blind, randomized, placebo
controlled study of the efficacy and safety of 5-Loxin for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis Res Ther. (2008)

32.   Madisch A, Miehlke S, Eichele O, Mrwa J, Bethke B, Kuhlisch E, Bästlein E, Wilhelms G, Morgner A, Wigginghaus B, Stolte M

Boswellia serrata extract for the treatment of collagenous colitis. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter
trial.. Int J Colorectal Dis. (2007-Dec)

33.   Alessandra Pedretti, Rossana Capezzera, Cristina Zane, Elena Facchinetti, Piergiacomo Calzavara-Pinton Effects of topical

boswellic acid on photo and age-damaged skin: clinical, biophysical, and echographic evaluations in a double-blind,
randomized, split-face study. Planta Med. (2010 Apr)

34.   Belcaro G, Gizzi G, Pellegrini L, Corsi M, Dugall M, Cacchio M, Feragalli B, Togni S, Riva A, Eggenhoffner R, Giacomelli L

Supplementation with a lecithin-based delivery form of Boswellia serrata extract (Casperome®) controls symptoms of mild
irritable bowel syndrome.. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. (2017-May)

35.   Acebo E, Ratón JA, Sautúa S, Eizaguirre X, Trébol I, Pérez JL Allergic contact dermatitis from Boswellia serrata extract in a

naturopathic cream.. Contact Dermatitis. (2004-Aug)

36.   Kokkiripati PK, Bhakshu LM, Marri S, Padmasree K, Row AT, Raghavendra AS, Tetali SD Gum resin of Boswellia serrata inhibited

human monocytic (THP-1) cell activation and platelet aggregation.. J Ethnopharmacol. (2011-Sep-01)

37.   Alfonso E Bello, Steffen Oesser Collagen hydrolysate for the treatment of osteoarthritis and other joint disorders: a review of the

literature. Curr Med Res Opin. (2006 Nov)

38.   Osawa Y, Mizushige T, Jinno S, Sugihara F, Inoue N, Tanaka H, Kabuyama Y Absorption and metabolism of orally administered

collagen hydrolysates evaluated by the vascularly perfused rat intestine and liver in situ.. Biomed Res. (2018)

39.   Kleinnijenhuis et al Non-targeted and targeted analysis of collagen hydrolysates during the course of digestion and absorption.

Anal Bioanal Chem. (2019)

40.   Smolen JS, Aletaha D Rheumatoid arthritis therapy reappraisal: strategies, opportunities and challenges. Nat Rev Rheumatol.

(2015 May)

41.   Bakilan F, Armagan O, Ozgen M, Tascioglu F, Bolluk O, Alatas O Effects of Native Type II Collagen Treatment on Knee

Osteoarthritis: A Randomized Controlled Trial.. Eurasian J Med. (2016-Jun)

42.   James P Lugo, Zainulabedin M Saiyed, Nancy E Lane Efficacy and tolerability of an undenatured type II collagen supplement
in modulating knee osteoarthritis symptoms: a multicenter randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Nutr J. (2016
Jan 29)

43.   Suresh Kumar, Fumihito Sugihara, Keiji Suzuki, Naoki Inoue, Sriraam Venkateswarathirukumara A double-blind, placebo-

controlled, randomised, clinical study on the effectiveness of collagen peptide on osteoarthritis. J Sci Food Agric. (2015 Mar 15)

44.   Lugo JP, Saiyed ZM, Lau FC, Molina JP, Pakdaman MN, Shamie AN, Udani JK Undenatured type II collagen (UC-II®) for joint
support: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in healthy volunteers. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. (2013 Oct 24)

45.   Crowley DC, Lau FC, Sharma P, Evans M, Guthrie N, Bagchi M, Bagchi D, Dey DK, Raychaudhuri SP Safety and efficacy of
undenatured type II collagen in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: a clinical trial. Int J Med Sci. (2009 Oct 9)

46.   P Benito-Ruiz, M M Camacho-Zambrano, J N Carrillo-Arcentales, M A Mestanza-Peralta, C A Vallejo-Flores, S V Vargas-López,
R A Villacís-Tamayo, L A Zurita-Gavilanes A randomized controlled trial on the efficacy and safety of a food ingredient, collagen
hydrolysate, for improving joint comfort. Int J Food Sci Nutr. (2009)

47.   T E McAlindon, M Nuite, N Krishnan, R Ruthazer, L L Price, D Burstein, J Griffith, K Flechsenhar Change in knee osteoarthritis

cartilage detected by delayed gadolinium enhanced magnetic resonance imaging following treatment with collagen
hydrolysate: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. (2011 Apr)

48.   Schauss AG, Stenehjem J, Park J, Endres JR, Clewell A Effect of the novel low molecular weight hydrolyzed chicken sternal
cartilage extract, BioCell Collagen, on improving osteoarthritis-related symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial.. J Agric Food Chem. (2012-Apr-25)

49.   O Bruyère, B Zegels, L Leonori, V Rabenda, A Janssen, C Bourges, J-Y Reginster Effect of collagen hydrolysate in articular

pain: a 6-month randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study. Complement Ther Med. (2012 Jun)

50.   Coen C W G Bongers, Dominique S M Ten Haaf, Milène Catoire, Bregina Kersten, Jeroen A Wouters, Thijs M H Eijsvogels, Maria
T E Hopman Effectiveness of collagen supplementation on pain scores in healthy individuals with self-reported knee pain: a
randomized controlled trial. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. (2020 Jul)

51.   Jiang et al Collagen peptides improve knee osteoarthritis in elderly women. Agro Food Ind Hi Tech. (2014)

52.   Stančík R, et al Collagen type I in the treatment of painful osteoarthritis of the knee. Reumatologia. (2012)

53.   Zdzieblik D, Oesser S, Gollhofer A, König D Improvement of activity-related knee joint discomfort following supplementation of

specific collagen peptides.. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. (2017-Jun)

54.   Clark KL, Sebastianelli W, Flechsenhar KR, Aukermann DF, Meza F, Millard RL, Deitch JR, Sherbondy PS, Albert A 24-Week

study on the use of collagen hydrolysate as a dietary supplement in athletes with activity-related joint pain. Curr Med Res Opin.
(2008 May)

55.   Denise Zdzieblik, Judith Brame, Steffen Oesser, Albert Gollhofer, Daniel König The Influence of Specific Bioactive Collagen

41

Peptides on Knee Joint Discomfort in Young Physically Active Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients. (2021 Feb 5)

56.   Trč T, Bohmová J Efficacy and tolerance of enzymatic hydrolysed collagen (EHC) vs. glucosamine sulphate (GS) in the

treatment of knee osteoarthritis (KOA).. Int Orthop. (2011-Mar)

57.   Hewlings SJ, Kalman DS Curcumin: A Review of Its' Effects on Human Health. Foods. (2017 Oct 22)

58.   Panahi Y, Rahimnia AR, Sharafi M, Alishiri G, Saburi A, Sahebkar A Curcuminoid treatment for knee osteoarthritis: a randomized

double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Phytother Res. (2014 Nov)

59.   Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Dugall M, Pellegrini L, Ledda A, Grossi MG, Togni S, Appendino G Efficacy and safety of Meriva®, a
curcumin-phosphatidylcholine complex, during extended administration in osteoarthritis patients. Altern Med Rev. (2010 Dec)

60.   Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Dugall M, Pellegrini L, Ledda A, Grossi MG, Togni S, Appendino G Product-evaluation registry of

Meriva®, a curcumin-phosphatidylcholine complex, for the complementary management of osteoarthritis. Panminerva Med.
(2010 Jun)

61.   Vilai Kuptniratsaikul, Sunee Thanakhumtorn, Pornsiri Chinswangwatanakul, Luksamee Wattanamongkonsil, Visanu Thamlikitkul
Efficacy and safety of Curcuma domestica extracts in patients with knee osteoarthritis. J Altern Complement Med. (2009 Aug)

62.   Madhu K, Chanda K, Saji MJ Safety and efficacy of Curcuma longa extract in the treatment of painful knee osteoarthritis: a

randomized placebo-controlled trial. Inflammopharmacology. (2013 Apr)

63.   Nakagawa Y, Mukai S, Yamada S, Matsuoka M, Tarumi E, Hashimoto T, Tamura C, Imaizumi A, Nishihira J, Nakamura T Short-
term effects of highly-bioavailable curcumin for treating knee osteoarthritis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
prospective study. J Orthop Sci. (2014 Nov)

64.   Haroyan A, Mukuchyan V, Mkrtchyan N, Minasyan N, Gasparyan S, Sargsyan A, Narimanyan M, Hovhannisyan A Efficacy and

safety of curcumin and its combination with boswellic acid in osteoarthritis: a comparative, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. BMC Complement Altern Med. (2018 Jan 9)

65.   Kuptniratsaikul V, Dajpratham P, Taechaarpornkul W, Buntragulpoontawee M, Lukkanapichonchut P, Chootip C, Saengsuwan
J, Tantayakom K, Laongpech S Efficacy and safety of Curcuma domestica extracts compared with ibuprofen in patients with
knee osteoarthritis: a multicenter study. Clin Interv Aging. (2014 Mar 20)

66.   Panda SK, Nirvanashetty S, Parachur VA, Mohanty N, Swain T A Randomized, Double Blind, Placebo Controlled, Parallel-Group
Study to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Curene® versus Placebo in Reducing Symptoms of Knee OA. Biomed Res Int.
(2018 Oct 25)

67.   Pinsornsak P, Niempoog S The efficacy of Curcuma Longa L. extract as an adjuvant therapy in primary knee osteoarthritis: a

randomized control trial. J Med Assoc Thai. (2012 Jan)

68.   Shep D, Khanwelkar C, Gade P, Karad S Safety and efficacy of curcumin versus diclofenac in knee osteoarthritis: a

randomized open-label parallel-arm study. Trials. (2019 Apr 11)

69.   Srivastava S, Saksena AK, Khattri S, Kumar S, Dagur RS Curcuma longa extract reduces inflammatory and oxidative stress

biomarkers in osteoarthritis of knee: a four-month, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Inflammopharmacology.
(2016 Dec)

70.   Y Henrotin, M Malaise, R Wittoek, K de Vlam, J-P Brasseur, F P Luyten, Q Jiangang, M Van den Berghe, R Uhoda, J Bentin, T

De Vroey, L Erpicum, A F Donneau, Y Dierckxsens Bio-optimized Curcuma longa extract is efficient on knee osteoarthritis pain:
a double-blind multicenter randomized placebo controlled three-arm study. Arthritis Res Ther. (2019 Jul 27)

71.   Wang Z, Singh A, Jones G, Winzenberg T, Ding C, Chopra A, Das S, Danda D, Laslett L, Antony B Efficacy and Safety of

Turmeric Extracts for the Treatment of Knee Osteoarthritis: a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Randomised Controlled
Trials.. Curr Rheumatol Rep. (2021-Jan-28)

72.   Wu J, Lv M, Zhou Y Efficacy and side effect of curcumin for the treatment of osteoarthritis: A meta-analysis of randomized

controlled trials.. Pak J Pharm Sci. (2019-Jan)

73.   Raveendhara R Bannuru, Mikala C Osani, Fatimah Al-Eid, Chenchen Wang Efficacy of curcumin and Boswellia for knee

osteoarthritis: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Semin Arthritis Rheum. (2018 Dec)

74.   Igho J Onakpoya, Elizabeth A Spencer, Rafael Perera, Carl J Heneghan Effectiveness of curcuminoids in the treatment of knee

osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Int J Rheum Dis. (2017 Apr)

75.   Mathieu S, Soubrier M, Peirs C, Monfoulet LE, Boirie Y, Tournadre A A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of Nutritional

Supplementation on Osteoarthritis Symptoms.. Nutrients. (2022-Apr-12)

76.   Amalraj A, Varma K, Jacob J, Divya C, Kunnumakkara AB, Stohs SJ, Gopi S A Novel Highly Bioavailable Curcumin Formulation

Improves Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators in Rheumatoid Arthritis Patients: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-
Controlled, Two-Dose, Three-Arm, and Parallel-Group Study. J Med Food. (2017 Oct)

77.   Chandran B, Goel A A randomized, pilot study to assess the efficacy and safety of curcumin in patients with active rheumatoid

arthritis. Phytother Res. (2012 Nov)

78.   Javadi M, Khadem Haghighian H, Goodarzy S, Abbasi M, Nassiri-Asl M Effect of curcumin nanomicelle on the clinical symptoms

of patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial.. Int J Rheum Dis. (2019-Oct)

79.   Jacob J, Amalraj A, Raj KKJ, Divya C, Kunnumakkara AB, Gopi S A novel bioavailable hydrogenated curcuminoids formulation
(CuroWhite™) improves symptoms and diagnostic indicators in rheumatoid arthritis patients - A randomized, double blind and
placebo controlled study.. J Tradit Complement Med. (2019-Oct)

42

80.   Vollono L, Falconi M, Gaziano R, Iacovelli F, Dika E, Terracciano C, Bianchi L, Campione E Potential of Curcumin in Skin

Disorders.. Nutrients. (2019-Sep-10)

81.   Luber RP, Rentsch C, Lontos S, Pope JD, Aung AK, Schneider HG, Kemp W, Roberts SK, Majeed A Turmeric Induced Liver

Injury: A Report of Two Cases.. Case Reports Hepatol. (2019)

82.   Lukefahr AL, McEvoy S, Alfafara C, Funk JL Drug-induced autoimmune hepatitis associated with turmeric dietary supplement

use.. BMJ Case Rep. (2018-Sep-10)

83.   Shamsi S, Tran H, Tan RS, Tan ZJ, Lim LY Curcumin, Piperine, and Capsaicin: A Comparative Study of Spice-Mediated

Inhibition of Human Cytochrome P450 Isozyme Activities.. Drug Metab Dispos. (2017-Jan)

84.   Bhardwaj RK, Glaeser H, Becquemont L, Klotz U, Gupta SK, Fromm MF Piperine, a major constituent of black pepper, inhibits

human P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4.. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. (2002-Aug)

85.   Aref Zayed, Wahby M Babaresh, Ruba S Darweesh, Tamam El-Elimat, Sahar S Hawamdeh Piperine Alters the Pharmacokinetics

and Anticoagulation of Warfarin in Rats. J Exp Pharmacol. (2020 Jun 19)

86.   Rodríguez Castaño P, Parween S, Pandey AV Bioactivity of Curcumin on the Cytochrome P450 Enzymes of the Steroidogenic

Pathway.. Int J Mol Sci. (2019-Sep-17)

87.   Daveluy A, Géniaux H, Thibaud L, Mallaret M, Miremont-Salamé G, Haramburu F Probable interaction between an oral vitamin K

antagonist and turmeric (Curcuma longa).. Therapie. (2014)

88.   Srivastava KC, Bordia A, Verma SK Curcumin, a major component of food spice turmeric (Curcuma longa) inhibits aggregation

and alters eicosanoid metabolism in human blood platelets.. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. (1995-Apr)

89.   Neerati P, Devde R, Gangi AK Evaluation of the effect of curcumin capsules on glyburide therapy in patients with type-2

diabetes mellitus.. Phytother Res. (2014-Dec)

90.   Edyta Brzustewicz, Ewa Bryl The role of cytokines in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis--Practical and potential

application of cytokines as biomarkers and targets of personalized therapy. Cytokine. (2015 Dec)

91.   Oscar D Rangel-Huerta, Concepcion M Aguilera, Maria D Mesa, Angel Gil Omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids

supplementation on inflammatory biomakers: a systematic review of randomised clinical trials. Br J Nutr. (2012 Jun)

92.   Fortin PR, Lew RA, Liang MH, Wright EA, Beckett LA, Chalmers TC, Sperling RI Validation of a meta-analysis: the effects of fish

oil in rheumatoid arthritis.. J Clin Epidemiol. (1995-Nov)

93.   Robert J Goldberg, Joel Katz A meta-analysis of the analgesic effects of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation

for inflammatory joint pain. Pain. (2007 May)

94.   Senftleber NK, Nielsen SM, Andersen JR, Bliddal H, Tarp S, Lauritzen L, Furst DE, Suarez-Almazor ME, Lyddiatt A, Christensen
R Marine Oil Supplements for Arthritis Pain: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Trials.. Nutrients. (2017-
Jan-06)

95.   Aristea Gioxari, Andriana C Kaliora, Foteini Marantidou, Demosthenes P Panagiotakos Intake of ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids

in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrition. (2018 Jan)

96.   Kuszewski JC, Wong RHX, Howe PRC Fish oil supplementation reduces osteoarthritis-specific pain in older adults with

overweight/obesity.. Rheumatol Adv Pract. (2020)

97.   Cleland LG, James MJ, Proudman SM The role of fish oils in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.. Drugs. (2003)

98.   Lindsey A MacFarlane, Nancy R Cook, Eunjung Kim, I-Min Lee, Maura D Iversen, David Gordon, Julie E Buring, Jeffrey N Katz,
JoAnn E Manson, Karen H Costenbader The Effects of Vitamin D and Marine Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation on Chronic
Knee Pain in Older U.S. Adults: Results from a Randomized Trial. Arthritis Rheumatol. (2020 Jun 25)

99.   Alfaddagh A, Elajami TK, Saleh M, Elajami M, Bistrian BR, Welty FK The effect of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids

on physical function, exercise, and joint replacement in patients with coronary artery disease: A secondary analysis of a
randomized clinical trial.. J Clin Lipidol. (2018)

100.   Suzuki Y, Fukushima M, Sakuraba K, Sawaki K, Sekigawa K Krill Oil Improves Mild Knee Joint Pain: A Randomized Control Trial..

PLoS One. (2016)

101.   Alfaddagh A and Welty F K Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation Reduces Inflammation and Improves Physical Function in

Patient With Coronary Artery Disease. Circulation. (2015 Oct)

102.   Stephen J Nicholls, A Michael Lincoff, Michelle Garcia, Dianna Bash, Christie M Ballantyne, Philip J Barter, Michael H Davidson,
John J P Kastelein, Wolfgang Koenig, Darren K McGuire, Dariush Mozaffarian, Paul M Ridker, Kausik K Ray, Brian G Katona,
Anders Himmelmann, Larrye E Loss, Martin Rensfeldt, Torbjörn Lundström, Rahul Agrawal, Venu Menon, Kathy Wolski, Steven E
Nissen Effect of High-Dose Omega-3 Fatty Acids vs Corn Oil on Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events in Patients at High
Cardiovascular Risk: The STRENGTH Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. (2020 Dec 8)

103.   Wang C, Chung M, Lichtenstein A, Balk E, Kupelnick B, DeVine D, Lawrence A, Lau J Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on

cardiovascular disease.. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ). (2004-Mar)

104.   Cleland LG, James MJ, Proudman SM Fish oil: what the prescriber needs to know.. Arthritis Res Ther. (2006)

105.   Buckley MS, Goff AD, Knapp WE Fish oil interaction with warfarin.. Ann Pharmacother. (2004-Jan)

106.   Elizabeth M McClaskey, Elizabeth Landrum Michalets Subdural hematoma after a fall in an elderly patient taking high-dose
omega-3 fatty acids with warfarin and aspirin: case report and review of the literature. Pharmacotherapy. (2007 Jan)

43

107.   Kristof Vanschoonbeek, Marion A H Feijge, Martine Paquay, Jan Rosing, Wim Saris, Cornelis Kluft, Peter L A Giesen, Moniek P M

de Maat, Johan W M Heemskerk Variable hypocoagulant effect of fish oil intake in humans: modulation of fibrinogen level and
thrombin generation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2004 Sep)

108.   John Alfred Carr Role of Fish Oil in Post-Cardiotomy Bleeding: A Summary of the Basic Science and Clinical Trials. Ann Thorac

Surg. (2018 May)

109.   Begtrup KM, Krag AE, Hvas AM No impact of fish oil supplements on bleeding risk: a systematic review. Dan Med J. (2017

May)

110.   Albert BB, Derraik JG, Cameron-Smith D, Hofman PL, Tumanov S, Villas-Boas SG, Garg ML, Cutfield WS Fish oil supplements in

New Zealand are highly oxidised and do not meet label content of n-3 PUFA. Sci Rep. (2015 Jan 21)

111.   Bannenberg G, Mallon C, Edwards H, Yeadon D, Yan K, Johnson H, Ismail A Omega-3 Long-Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid

Content and Oxidation State of Fish Oil Supplements in New Zealand. Sci Rep. (2017 May 3)

112.   Bengtson Nash SM, Schlabach M, Nichols PD A nutritional-toxicological assessment of Antarctic krill oil versus fish oil dietary

supplements. Nutrients. (2014 Aug 28)

113.   Ottestad I, Retterstøl K, Myhrstad MC, Andersen LF, Vogt G, Nilsson A, Borge GI, Nordvi B, Brønner KW, Ulven SM, Holven KB
Intake of oxidised fish oil does not affect circulating levels of oxidised LDL or inflammatory markers in healthy subjects. Nutr
Metab Cardiovasc Dis. (2013 Jan)

114.   García-Hernández VM, Gallar M, Sánchez-Soriano J, Micol V, Roche E, García-García E Effect of omega-3 dietary supplements
with different oxidation levels in the lipidic profile of women: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Food Sci Nutr. (2013 Dec)

115.   Vasiliadis HS, Tsikopoulos K Glucosamine and chondroitin for the treatment of osteoarthritis. World J Orthop. (2017 Jan 18)

116.   Jerosch J Effects of Glucosamine and Chondroitin Sulfate on Cartilage Metabolism in OA: Outlook on Other Nutrient Partners

Especially Omega-3 Fatty Acids.. Int J Rheumatol. (2011)

117.   Iovu M, Dumais G, du Souich P Anti-inflammatory activity of chondroitin sulfate. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. (2008)

118.   Jang BC, Sung SH, Park JG, Park JW, Bae JH, Shin DH, Park GY, Han SB, Suh SI Glucosamine hydrochloride specifically

inhibits COX-2 by preventing COX-2 N-glycosylation and by increasing COX-2 protein turnover in a proteasome-dependent
manner.. J Biol Chem. (2007-Sep-21)

119.   Knapik JJ, Pope R, Hoedebecke SS, Schram B, Orr R Effects of Oral Chondroitin Sulfate on Osteoarthritis-Related Pain and

Joint Structural Changes: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.. J Spec Oper Med. (2019)

120.   Honvo G, Bruyère O, Geerinck A, Veronese N, Reginster JY Efficacy of Chondroitin Sulfate in Patients with Knee Osteoarthritis:

A Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Exploring Inconsistencies in Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trials.. Adv Ther. (2019-May)

121.   Beaudart C, Lengelé L, Leclercq V, Geerinck A, Sanchez-Rodriguez D, Bruyère O, Reginster JY Symptomatic Efficacy of

Pharmacological Treatments for Knee Osteoarthritis: A Systematic Review and a Network Meta-Analysis with a 6-Month Time
Horizon.. Drugs. (2020-Dec)

122.   Yang W, Sun C, He SQ, Chen JY, Wang Y, Zhuo Q The Efficacy and Safety of Disease-Modifying Osteoarthritis Drugs for Knee

and Hip Osteoarthritis-a Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.. J Gen Intern Med. (2021-Jul)

123.   Zhu X, Sang L, Wu D, Rong J, Jiang L Effectiveness and safety of glucosamine and chondroitin for the treatment of

osteoarthritis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.. J Orthop Surg Res. (2018-Jul-06)

124.   Clegg DO, Reda DJ, Harris CL, Klein MA, O'Dell JR, Hooper MM, Bradley JD, Bingham CO 3rd, Weisman MH, Jackson CG, Lane
NE, Cush JJ, Moreland LW, Schumacher HR Jr, Oddis CV, Wolfe F, Molitor JA, Yocum DE, Schnitzer TJ, Furst DE, Sawitzke AD,
Shi H, Brandt KD, Moskowitz RW, Williams HJ Glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, and the two in combination for painful knee
osteoarthritis. N Engl J Med. (2006 Feb 23)

125.   Lukas Martin Wildi, Jean-Pierre Raynauld, Johanne Martel-Pelletier, André Beaulieu, Louis Bessette, Frédéric Morin, François

Abram, Marc Dorais, Jean-Pierre Pelletier Chondroitin sulphate reduces both cartilage volume loss and bone marrow lesions in
knee osteoarthritis patients starting as early as 6 months after initiation of therapy: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled pilot study using MRI. Ann Rheum Dis. (2011 Jun)

126.   Greenlee H, Crew KD, Shao T, Kranwinkel G, Kalinsky K, Maurer M, Brafman L, Insel B, Tsai WY, Hershman DL Phase II study of

glucosamine with chondroitin on aromatase inhibitor-associated joint symptoms in women with breast cancer.. Support Care
Cancer. (2013-Apr)

127.   Rozenfeld V, Crain JL, Callahan AK Possible augmentation of warfarin effect by glucosamine-chondroitin.. Am J Health Syst

Pharm. (2004-Feb-01)

128.   Knudsen JF, Sokol GH Potential glucosamine-warfarin interaction resulting in increased international normalized ratio: case

report and review of the literature and MedWatch database.. Pharmacotherapy. (2008-Apr)

129.   Claire Hoban, Roger Byard, Ian Musgrave Hypersensitive adverse drug reactions to glucosamine and chondroitin preparations

in Australia between 2000 and 2011. Postgrad Med J. (2020 Apr)

130.   Knapik JJ, Pope R, Hoedebecke SS, Schram B, Orr R, Lieberman HR Effects of Oral Glucosamine Sulfate on Osteoarthritis-

Related Pain and Joint-Space Changes: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.. J Spec Oper Med.

131.   Pavelká K, Gatterová J, Olejarová M, Machacek S, Giacovelli G, Rovati LC Glucosamine sulfate use and delay of progression of

knee osteoarthritis: a 3-year, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study. Arch Intern Med. (2002 Oct 14)

132.   McAlindon T, Formica M, LaValley M, Lehmer M, Kabbara K Effectiveness of glucosamine for symptoms of knee osteoarthritis:

44

results from an internet-based randomized double-blind controlled trial. Am J Med. (2004 Nov 1)

133.   Usha PR, Naidu MU Randomised, Double-Blind, Parallel, Placebo-Controlled Study of Oral Glucosamine, Methylsulfonylmethane

and their Combination in Osteoarthritis. Clin Drug Investig. (2004)

134.   B Balkan, B E Dunning Glucosamine inhibits glucokinase in vitro and produces a glucose-specific impairment of in vivo insulin

secretion in rats. Diabetes. (1994 Oct)

135.   B A Biggee, C M Blinn, M Nuite, J E Silbert, T E McAlindon Effects of oral glucosamine sulphate on serum glucose and insulin

during an oral glucose tolerance test of subjects with osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. (2007 Feb)

136.   Simon RR, Marks V, Leeds AR, Anderson JW A comprehensive review of oral glucosamine use and effects on glucose

metabolism in normal and diabetic individuals.. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. (2011-Jan)

137.   Dostrovsky NR, Towheed TE, Hudson RW, Anastassiades TP The effect of glucosamine on glucose metabolism in humans: a

systematic review of the literature.. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. (2011-Apr)

138.   Ebisuzaki K Aspirin and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM): a search for common mechanisms, with implications for cancer

prevention.. Anticancer Res. (2003)

139.   Beilke MA, Collins-Lech C, Sohnle PG Effects of dimethyl sulfoxide on the oxidative function of human neutrophils.. J Lab Clin

Med. (1987-Jul)

140.   Nakhostin-Roohi B, Barmaki S, Khoshkhahesh F, Bohlooli S Effect of chronic supplementation with methylsulfonylmethane on

oxidative stress following acute exercise in untrained healthy men. J Pharm Pharmacol. (2011 Oct)

141.   Kim LS, Axelrod LJ, Howard P, Buratovich N, Waters RF Efficacy of methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) in osteoarthritis pain of the

knee: a pilot clinical trial.. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. (2006-Mar)

142.   Debbi EM, Agar G, Fichman G, Ziv YB, Kardosh R, Halperin N, Elbaz A, Beer Y, Debi R Efficacy of methylsulfonylmethane

supplementation on osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized controlled study. BMC Complement Altern Med. (2011 Jun 27)

143.   Lubis AMT, Siagian C, Wonggokusuma E, Marsetyo AF, Setyohadi B Comparison of Glucosamine-Chondroitin Sulfate with and

without Methylsulfonylmethane in Grade I-II Knee Osteoarthritis: A Double Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. Acta Med Indones.
(2017 Apr)

144.   Withee ED, Tippens KM, Dehen R, Tibbitts D, Hanes D, Zwickey H Effects of Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) on exercise-

induced oxidative stress, muscle damage, and pain following a half-marathon: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial.. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. (2017)

145.   Tennent DJ, Hylden CM, Kocher BK, Aden JK, Johnson AE A randomized controlled trial evaluating methylsulfonylmethane

versus placebo to prevent knee pain in military initial entry trainees.. US Army Med Dep J. (2017)

146.   Crawford P, Crawford A, Nielson F, Lystrup R Methylsulfonylmethane for treatment of low back pain: A safety analysis of a

randomized, controlled trial.. Complement Ther Med. (2019-Aug)

147.   Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Errichi S, Zulli C, Errichi BM, Vinciguerra G, Ledda A, Di Renzo A, Stuard S, Dugall M, Pellegrini L,

Errichi S, Gizzi G, Ippolito E, Ricci A, Cacchio M, Cipollone G, Ruffini I, Fano F, Hosoi M, Rohdewald P Treatment of osteoarthritis
with Pycnogenol. The SVOS (San Valentino Osteo-arthrosis Study). Evaluation of signs, symptoms, physical performance and
vascular aspects. Phytother Res. (2008 Apr)

148.   Farid R et al Pycnogenol supplementation reduces pain and stiffness and improves physical function in adults with knee

osteoarthritis. Nutr Res. (2007 Nov)

149.   Cisár P, Jány R, Waczulíková I, Sumegová K, Muchová J, Vojtassák J, Duraćková Z, Lisý M, Rohdewald P Effect of pine bark

extract (Pycnogenol) on symptoms of knee osteoarthritis. Phytother Res. (2008 Aug)

150.   Rohdewald PJ Update on the clinical pharmacology of Pycnogenol(R).

151.   Simpson T, Kure C, Stough C Assessing the Efficacy and Mechanisms of Pycnogenol on Cognitive Aging From Animal and

Human Studies.. Front Pharmacol. (2019)

152.   Melnyk J, Wang S, Marcone M Chemical and biological properties of the world&#039;s most expensive spice: Saffron. Food

Res Int. (2010 Oct)

153.   A A Noorbala, S Akhondzadeh, N Tahmacebi-Pour, A H Jamshidi Hydro-alcoholic extract of Crocus sativus L. versus fluoxetine
in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized pilot trial. J Ethnopharmacol. (2005 Feb 28)

154.   Hamidi Z, Aryaeian N, Abolghasemi J The effect of saffron supplement on clinical outcomes and metabolic profiles in patients

with active rheumatoid arthritis: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Phytotherapy Research. (2020
Feb)

155.   van Riel PL The development of the disease activity score (DAS) and the disease activity score using 28 joint counts (DAS28)..

Clin Exp Rheumatol. (2014)

156.   van Riel P C M V The development of the disease activity score (DAS) and the disease activity score using 28 joint counts

(DAS28). Clin Exp Rheumatol. (2014 Sep/Oct)

157.   Zahra Hamidi, Naheed Aryaeian, Jamileh Abolghasemi, Fatemeh Shirani, Mahsa Hadidi, Soudabeh Fallah, Nariman Moradi The

effect of saffron supplement on clinical outcomes and metabolic profiles in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Phytother Res. (2020 Jul)

158.   Javad Poursamimi, Zhaleh Shariati-Sarabi, Jalil Tavakkol-Afshari, Seyed Ahmad Mohajeri, Mohsen Ghoryani, Mojgan

Mohammadi Immunoregulatory Effects of Krocina™, a Herbal Medicine Made of Crocin, on Osteoarthritis Patients: A Successful
45

Clinical Trial in Iran. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. (2020 Jun 23)

159.   Barbara Tóth, Péter Hegyi, Tamás Lantos, Zsolt Szakács, Beáta Kerémi, Gábor Varga, Judit Tenk, Erika Pétervári, Márta
Balaskó, Zoltán Rumbus, Zoltán Rakonczay, Emese Réka Bálint, Tivadar Kiss, Dezső Csupor The Efficacy of Saffron in the
Treatment of Mild to Moderate Depression: A Meta-analysis. Planta Med. (2019 Jan)

160.   Jamal Rahmani, Nicla Manzari, Jacqueline Thompson, Cain C T Clark, Gemma Villanueva, Hamed Kord Varkaneh, Parvin
Mirmiran The effect of saffron on weight and lipid profile: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and dose-response of
randomized clinical trials. Phytother Res. (2019 Sep)

161.   Safarinejad MR, Shafiei N, Safarinejad S A prospective double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study of the effect of
saffron (Crocus sativus Linn.) on semen parameters and seminal plasma antioxidant capacity in infertile men with idiopathic
oligoasthenoteratozoospermia. Phytother Res. (2011 Apr)

162.   G Dovrtělová, K Nosková, J Juřica, M Turjap, O Zendulka Can bioactive compounds of Crocus sativus L. influence the

metabolic activity of selected CYP enzymes in the rat?. Physiol Res. (2015)

163.   Akhondzadeh S, Fallah-Pour H, Afkham K Comparison of Crocus sativus L. and imipramine in the treatment of mild to moderate

depression: a pilot double-blind randomized trial. BMC complementary and alternative medicine.

164.   Noorbala AA, Akhondzadeh SH, Tahmacebi-Pour N https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15707766/title=Hydro-alcoholic extract
of Crocus sativus L. versus fluoxetine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized pilot trial..
Journal of ethnopharmacology. (2005 Feb)

165.   Li H, Zou Y, Ding G Dietary factors associated with dental erosion: a meta-analysis. PLoS One. (2012)

166.   Danielle R Bruns, Sarah E Ehrlicher, Shadi Khademi, Laurie M Biela, Frederick F Peelor 3rd, Benjamin F Miller, Karyn L Hamilton

Differential effects of vitamin C or protandim on skeletal muscle adaptation to exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985). (2018 Aug 1)

167.   Gomez-Cabrera MC, Domenech E, Romagnoli M, Arduini A, Borras C, Pallardo FV, Sastre J, Viña J Oral administration of vitamin
C decreases muscle mitochondrial biogenesis and hampers training-induced adaptations in endurance performance. Am J Clin
Nutr. (2008 Jan)

168.   Hatch M, Mulgrew S, Bourke E, Keogh B, Costello J Effect of megadoses of ascorbic acid on serum and urinary oxalate.. Eur

Urol. (1980)

169.   Steven Gabardi, Kristin Munz, Catherine Ulbricht A review of dietary supplement-induced renal dysfunction. Clin J Am Soc

Nephrol. (2007 Jul)

170.   Baxmann AC, De O G Mendonça C, Heilberg IP Effect of vitamin C supplements on urinary oxalate and pH in calcium stone-

forming patients.. Kidney Int. (2003-Mar)

171.   G J McHugh, M L Graber, R C Freebairn Fatal vitamin C-associated acute renal failure. Anaesth Intensive Care. (2008 Jul)

172.   Institute of Medicine (US) Panel on Dietary Antioxidants and Related Compounds Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C,

Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids.

173.   Andre CM, Hausman JF, Guerriero G Cannabis sativa: The Plant of the Thousand and One Molecules. Front Plant Sci. (2016 Feb

4)

174.   Corroon J, Phillips JA A Cross-Sectional Study of Cannabidiol Users. Cannabis Cannabinoid Res. (2018 Jul 1)

175.   National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Health and Medicine Division, Board on Population Health and
Public Health Practice, Committee on the Health Effects of Marijuana: An Evidence Review and Research Agenda The Health
Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids: The Current State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research.

176.   Richard J Bloomer, Tyler M Farney, Cameron G McCarthy, Sang-Rok Lee Cissus quadrangularis reduces joint pain in exercise-

trained men: a pilot study. Phys Sportsmed. (2013 Sep)

177.   Ewa M Roos, L Stefan Lohmander The Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS): from joint injury to osteoarthritis.

Health Qual Life Outcomes. (2003 Nov 3)

178.   Viswanath J, Cheekavolu C, Sankaraiah S Effect of Cissus quadrangularis linn and zingiber officinale rosc in osteoarthritis

patients.

179.   Wenhao Zheng, Yifan Mei, Chunhui Chen, Leyi Cai, Hua Chen The effectiveness and safety of Tripterygium wilfordii glycosides
combined with disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of 40 randomized controlled trials. Phytother Res. (2020 Dec 23)

180.   Allen KD, Golightly YM State of the evidence. Curr Opin Rheumatol. (2015 May)

181.   Bliddal H, Leeds AR, Christensen R Osteoarthritis, obesity and weight loss: evidence, hypotheses and horizons - a scoping

review. Obes Rev. (2014 Jul)

182.   Christensen R, Bartels EM, Astrup A, Bliddal H Effect of weight reduction in obese patients diagnosed with knee osteoarthritis: a

systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Rheum Dis. (2007 Apr)

183.   Iwamoto J, Sato Y, Takeda T, Matsumoto H RETRACTED ARTICLE. World J Orthop. (2011 May 18)

184.   Uthman OA, van der Windt DA, Jordan JL, Dziedzic KS, Healey EL, Peat GM, Foster NE Exercise for lower limb osteoarthritis:

systematic review incorporating trial sequential analysis and network meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med. (2014 Nov)

185.   Wang Y, Simpson JA, Wluka AE, Teichtahl AJ, English DR, Giles GG, Graves S, Cicuttini FM Is physical activity a risk factor for

primary knee or hip replacement due to osteoarthritis? A prospective cohort study. J Rheumatol. (2011 Feb)

46

186.   da Costa BR, Reichenbach S, Keller N, Nartey L, Wandel S, Jüni P, Trelle S Effectiveness of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory

drugs for the treatment of pain in knee and hip osteoarthritis: a network meta-analysis. Lancet. (2017 Jul 8)

187.   Machado GC, Maher CG, Ferreira PH, Pinheiro MB, Lin CW, Day RO, McLachlan AJ, Ferreira ML Efficacy and safety of

paracetamol for spinal pain and osteoarthritis: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised placebo controlled trials.
BMJ. (2015 Mar 31)

188.   Trelle S, Reichenbach S, Wandel S, Hildebrand P, Tschannen B, Villiger PM, Egger M, Jüni P Cardiovascular safety of non-

steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: network meta-analysis. BMJ. (2011 Jan 11)

189.   Anand P, Kunnumakkara AB, Newman RA, Aggarwal BB Bioavailability of curcumin: problems and promises. Mol Pharm. (2007

Nov-Dec)

190.   Shoba G, Joy D, Joseph T, Majeed M, Rajendran R, Srinivas PS Influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in

animals and human volunteers. Planta Med. (1998 May)

191.   Forsyth JE, Nurunnahar S, Islam SS, Baker M, Yeasmin D, Islam MS, Rahman M, Fendorf S, Ardoin NM, Winch PJ, Luby SP
Turmeric means "yellow" in Bengali: Lead chromate pigments added to turmeric threaten public health across Bangladesh.
Environ Res. (2019 Dec)

192.   Mogoşanu GD, Biţă A, Bejenaru LE, Bejenaru C, Croitoru O, Rău G, Rogoveanu OC, Florescu DN, Neamţu J, Scorei ID, Scorei RI

Calcium Fructoborate for Bone and Cardiovascular Health. Biol Trace Elem Res. (2016 Aug)

193.   Scorei R, Mitrut P, Petrisor I, Scorei I A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study to evaluate the effect of calcium

fructoborate on systemic inflammation and dyslipidemia markers for middle-aged people with primary osteoarthritis. Biol Trace
Elem Res. (2011 Dec)

194.   Price AK, de Godoy MRC, Harper TA, Knap KE, Joslyn S, Pietrzkowski Z, Cross BK, Detweiler KB, Swanson KS Effects of dietary

calcium fructoborate supplementation on joint comfort and flexibility and serum inflammatory markers in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Anim Sci. (2017 Jul)

195.   Rayman M Diet, nutrition and osteoarthritis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord.. (2015)

196.   Cota D, Marsicano G, Lutz B, Vicennati V, Stalla GK, Pasquali R, Pagotto U Endogenous cannabinoid system as a modulator of

food intake. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. (2003 Mar)

197.   Patel S, Cone RD Neuroscience: a cellular basis for the munchies. Nature. (2015 Mar 5)

198.   Wang H, Liu F, Yang L, Zu Y, Wang H, Qu S, Zhang Y Oxidative stability of fish oil supplemented with carnosic acid compared

with synthetic antioxidants during long-term storage. Food Chem. (2011 Sep 1)

199.   Vane JR, Botting RM Mechanism of action of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Am J Med. (1998 Mar 30)

200.   Puljak L, Marin A, Vrdoljak D, Markotic F, Utrobicic A, Tugwell P Celecoxib for osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.

(2017 May 22)

47

