Testosterone Supplement Guide

Written By: Michael Hull, Wyatt Brown, Antonis Damianou, & Daniel Feldman

Edited By: Jennifer Hoffner

Reviewed By: Wyatt Brown

Table of Contents

Introduction

Combos

Primary Supplements

Secondary Supplements

Promising Supplements

Unproven Supplements

Inadvisable Supplements

FAQ

2

Introduction

  Not many people are aware of the role testosterone plays in female libido, mood, muscle gain,[1] and fat

loss, so few women ever think about their levels. Conversely, some men are obsessed with their

testosterone levels — stressing out if their numbers are “below average” or if successive blood tests show

the smallest drop.

Although putting too much stock in numbers is a mistake, for reasons we shall review, guys are right to

care about their testosterone (T). Studies have shown that testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can

improve cognition, mood, libido, muscle mass, bone mineral density, and the production of red blood cells,

with the only notable downside being an uncertain (but probably null[2][3][4]) effect on prostate cancer.[5]

 Digging Deeper: Testosterone and your prostate

Testosterone was artificially synthesized for the first time in 1935. Soon after, it started to be used

as a potential therapy in clinical trials, with promising results. And then came some bad news: In the

early 1940s, a link between testosterone and prostate cancer was established (i.e., the “androgen

hypothesis”). One of the researchers even went on to win the Nobel Prize for discovering

connections between hormones and cancer.

For several decades, this finding cast a pall on the therapeutic use of T. But the most recent evidence

suggests that the androgen hypothesis is misleading: high testosterone levels don’t seem to cause

prostate cancer; rather, very low testosterone levels allow prostate cancer to regress (which is why

drugs that drastically lower T levels are frequently given to men with prostate cancer).

This new hypothesis is called the “saturation model”[22]: maximal stimulation of prostate cancer

happens at a relatively low T level, so moderate-to-high T levels may not have much of an additive

effect. Of course, medical science is rarely conclusive and never simple, so make sure to speak to

your physician about testosterone and medical conditions.

In the eyes of men, testosterone is the Holy Grail of hormones, and like the Grail, it is shrouded in mystery.

But taking the time to understand the concepts below gives a better idea of where T fits into the big

picture of fitness. That understanding in turn allows better targeting of efforts to optimize T levels.

3

Low testosterone can hide behind many
symptoms

If a person is feeling crappy in general, their physician will likely want to check their levels of the thyroid

hormones TSH, T4, and T3; vitamin-D; and, if the person is a man, testosterone.

That’s because testosterone plays a central role in wellness and vitality. In men, low T is notably linked to

inflammation, weight gain, and cardiovascular issues.[6] For the almost 40% of men over age 45 who have

low T,[7] this is bad news.

But what do low T levels mean? Are the person’s levels naturally lower than average? Is it normal, age-

4

related decline? Or is there something wrong with the body? If so, what is the culprit — or, more likely,

culprits? We’ll mention possible answers, but first, what are normal ranges?[8]

The T levels of American men seem to have decreased over the past few decades, for both total T and free

T.[9] Total T is all the testosterone floating around in the blood and has three components:

Tightly bound testosterone: About two-thirds of the T in blood is bound to sex-hormone-binding

globulin (SHBG). The body can’t use it.

Loosely bound testosterone: About a third of the T in the blood is bound to albumin. The body can

use it, with some effort.

Free testosterone: A small percentage of the T in blood (1–4%, as a rule) floats around freely. The

body can readily use it.

Together, loosely bound T and free T comprise bioavailable T, which has a greater impact on health than

total T does. For that reason, SHBG is often tested at the same time as total T: the higher the SHBG, the

lower the bioavailable T.

We mentioned earlier that putting too much stock in numbers is a mistake. One reason is that normal levels

may greatly differ from man to man. If a person, feeling under the weather for no apparent reason, decides

to get their T tested and finds they have low levels, they’re likely to think So that’s why! It may even be a

relief to have found the cause of the problem, because then they can start addressing it.

Except, maybe their levels were already low, when they felt perfectly fine; in other words, T levels could be

lower than average but not low for that person. If, for instance, the body’s androgen receptors are more

sensitive than average, the body would need to produce less T than average. The only way to know if

feeling crappy might be linked to a drop in T levels is to have had T levels tested before feeling crappy.

Another reason to avoid putting too much stock in numbers is that the normal range for total T can vary

greatly from lab to lab: from 160 to 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) at the bottom of the range and

from 726 to 1,130 ng/dL at the top of the range.[10]

5

 Tip: Low testosterone often doesn't correspond to symptoms

So a T level of 280 ng/dL may or may not be considered abnormally low, depending on the lab.

Age is just a number … except when it
comes to testosterone

Many supplement companies would like men to believe that plummeting testosterone as they get older

6

heralds doom. This age-related drop even has a fancy-sounding name: andropause. Oh no, my androgens

have paused! What do I do?!

Here’s what: Pause, back away from the supplement bottle, and look at what the evidence actually says.

Men start experiencing a yearly drop in total T (0.4–2%) and bioavailable T (2–3%) in their 30s.[11][12] But is

this drop caused entirely by the aging process? As with muscle mass, nobody really knows what a “natural”

decline in testosterone looks like in humans. We know we lose muscle mass and T as we age,[13][14] but how

much of this loss is attributable to the aging process itself, and how much to middle-aged men exercising

less (no more getting ripped to attract a partner), eating worse, and spending more time at home (caring

for family)?

 Tip: Find a way to stay accountable as you age

The dip (or plummet) in testosterone you experience as you get older can certainly worsen fat gain

and muscle loss, but not as much as habit changes can. Seniors, especially women, are substantially

less likely than other adults to meet their recommended levels of physical activity,[15] and the body,

being a miser, won’t expend calories to maintain muscles that aren’t regularly challenged.

Although seniors’ decline in physical activity is highlighted, that doesn’t mean the average middle-

aged adult does get enough exercise. Between prolonged work schedules and other responsibilities,

such as child-rearing, it’s all too easy to neglect diet and exercise, so you may want to “outsource”

your accountability. A workout buddy, running or walking group, or supportive gym can help on the

exercise front; and if you find it hard to stick to a diet, you might want to find a friend with a similar

problem, even if just to chat about how eating is going.

A healthier diet in middle age translates to fewer health issues in old age. And more exercise in

middle age translates to less sarcopenia (age-related muscle loss) in old age.[16]

Also, remember when we said that almost 40% of men over age 45 have low T? Well, there’s a wrinkle in

that story, and it’s an important one. Only 10% of those men have symptoms of low T.[7]

7

So there’s a mismatch: some men with low T have symptoms, while others feel okay or even great.

Moreover, symptoms often don’t change when testosterone is prescribed to elderly men with low-normal T

levels.[17] This confirms our previous observation that someone can feel crappy and have low T without the

two factors being causally linked.

8

 Tip: Testosterone over time

Testosterone decreases with age

How to boost testosterone

Boosting testosterone can be a game changer for some people (men and women). Unsurprisingly, it was

among the first topics requested for a Supplement Guide. But you should also be thinking about the forest,

not just the trees. Why is the level of testosterone low? What else might be going on?

Diet and testosterone are linked in too many ways to count, but we’ll mention two. First, diets very low in

calories or fat are likely to reduce T over time. Second, carrying extra pounds can lead to a vicious cycle:

1.  Extra body fat leads to worse metabolic health, and both lead to lower testosterone.[18]

2.  If lower testosterone makes a person feel crappy, they’re more likely to stress-eat[19] and less likely

to exercise.

3.  More stress-eating and less exercise is a recipe for weight gain, which circles right back to no. 1.

Testosterone can also plummet if a person sleeps too little, stresses too much, or even works out too much

(because too much cortisol, which is produced during exercise, can result in lower T).[20]

9

Other negative factors range from alcohol to BPA, a chemical that used to be in water bottles and is still

found in receipts and some kitchen items.[21] But only high doses of alcohol are likely to decrease T levels.

For most people, too much stress, too little sleep, and either too much or too little food are more likely to

be factors in low-T issues.

 Caution: Plastics and testosterone

Over millennia, various materials have been used to contain beverages and foods. Each material —

glass or metal, wood or animal hide — has pros but also cons, from being fragile to altering the taste

of its contents.

For decades, starting in the 1960s, plastic made with bisphenol A (BPA) was considered the ideal

material: light, resilient, and less likely than other plastics to absorb odors. Since then, however, BPA

has been shown to interact with estrogen receptors and potentially cause a plethora of adverse

effects in fetuses, infants, children, and adults (of both sexes).[23]

Eating canned foods (such as soup, fruit, or the canned foods going into the dishes you order) can

expose you to BPA,[24] as can handling a high volume of paper receipts or handling receipts

frequently.[25] Even though BPA is seldom used to make bottles anymore, many plastic bottles

advertised as BPA-free can release estrogenic chemicals.[26] Those exposures won’t necessarily tank

your T levels, but several alternatives exist, such as glass or metal bottles, plus using less plastic is a

good idea in general.

Prescription testosterone isn’t always necessary to feel better. For some men, yes, taking T will be the only

option that works; but for many others, a change in habits will do the trick. And for other people still,

testosterone isn’t even to blame for how they feel. There are a million and one reasons to be fatigued and

have a lower libido than usual!

Also, as you keep reading this guide, you’ll notice that some of the best-researched and most-effective

supplements for testosterone are also nutrients. When it comes to optimizing T levels, correcting a nutrient

deficiency is much more reliable than purchasing the latest hyped-up supplement backed by only three

studies (two of them in rats).

Kamal Patel, Co-founder and Director

MBA, MPH, PhD(c) in Nutrition

10

Combos

Core Combos

For general testosterone support, before trying
anything else

It may be wise to double-check levels of essential nutrients in general before taking anything nonessential.

Ensuring sufficient intake of these nutrients may reduce the likelihood of abnormally low T levels but are

unlikely to produce large increases for most people — and very unlikely to result in effects beyond

deficiency correction. Once the body has enough, further supplementation is pointless.

In particular, one essential nutrient has been verified to have a meaningful effect on low T levels, so it

makes sense to try it first.

Zinc

One of the following doses, depending on blood plasma zinc status (more information in the zinc section

below), should be taken daily in the form of zinc sulfate or gluconate. No intervention should be started

without first discussing it with a physician.

Mild deficiency: 30–40 mg for 2–4 weeks to raise levels to normal, after which 10–20 mg should

suffice for maintenance

Lower end of the normal range: 5–20 mg to maintain normal levels

Higher end of the normal range: 5 mg to maintain normal levels

Intoxication: Professional medical advice should be sought out. Any supplement containing zinc

should be stopped, unless otherwise instructed by a medical professional.

Unknown: Testing levels first would be prudent, but if that’s not feasible, dosage should be limited

to 5–20 mg/day (15–25 mg/day for vegetarians and vegans).

If nausea or discomfort is present, taking the zinc with food that is not rich in phytates (e.g., grains,

legumes, seeds, and nuts) could help, as those foods may reduce zinc absorption.

Magnesium and vitamin D have not been confirmed to help with low T, but low levels of the mineral or

vitamin may be worth correcting anyway.

11

 Tip: Why don’t you recommend specific supplement brands or companies?

We are 100% independent and extremely serious about being unbiased when it comes to nutrition

and supplement information. We only care about the science.

Our goal is to break down and make sense of research. We do not sell supplements or recommend

any brands, nor do we do any consulting or accept advertisements, donations, or sponsorships.

Because we don’t sell or recommend supplement brands, we have less incentive to hype any of them

up or misrepresent any research.

Having said all that, we are interested in keeping people safe. So here’s a list of steps that can be

taken if a supplement looks interesting.

Specialized Combos

For young men (<35 years old) who want to
increase their testosterone levels

Disclaimer: Herbal supplements have the potential to interact negatively with medications and with each

other. Using multiple herbal supplements together increases the chances of adverse effects, so it may be

wise to limit the number taken.

Young men can take 600–675 mg of KSM-66 ashwagandha extract or 240–600 mg of Shoden

ashwagandha. The latter contains 35% withanolide glycosides, so a supplement with the equivalent amount

may suffice, but all of these doses and forms are speculative, and optimal doses aren’t yet known.

If ashwagandha proves insufficient:

Add 500–600 mg of fenugreek per day, divided into two doses. Optimal doses and forms aren’t yet known.

For middle-aged men who want to support their
testosterone levels

If levels of the hormone DHEA-S are low, middle-aged men can consider supplementing with 20 mg of

DHEA daily, under the supervision of a doctor, for at least a month. If DHEA levels are elevated, adding

more increases the risk for side effects and should be avoided. If blood tests come back normal but higher

testosterone levels are still desired, the DHEA-S dose can be increased to 50 mg for another month. Even

though further increases in supplementation would likely increase T levels more, they aren’t advised due to

a lack of confidence in their safety.

Disclaimer: It should be noted that over-the-counter DHEA supplements are not legal in all jurisdictions, and

12

 
it is the user’s responsibility to ensure the legality of supplement usage. We do not encourage DHEA use

within jurisdictions where it is a controlled substance.

If DHEA has proven insufficient, 600–675 mg of KSM-66 ashwagandha extract or 240–600 mg of Shoden

ashwagandha can be taken. The latter contains 35% withanolide glycosides, so a supplement with the

equivalent amount may suffice, but all of these doses and forms are speculative, and optimal doses aren’t

yet known.

If ashwagandha proves to be insufficient, add 500–600 mg of fenugreek per day, divided into two doses.

Optimal doses and forms aren’t yet known.

Disclaimer: Herbal supplements have the potential to interact negatively with medications and with each

other. Using multiple herbal supplements together increases the chances of adverse effects, so it may be

wise to limit how many are taken.

For middle-aged women who want to support
their testosterone levels

If levels of the hormone DHEA-S are low, middle-aged women can take 10–30 mg of [DHEA per day, under

the supervision of a doctor. It’s ideal to start at the low end of the range for a month and then get tested

again, only increasing the dose if the previous dose was insufficient. If DHEA levels are high, adding more

increases the risk for side effects and should be avoided

Disclaimer: It should be noted that over-the-counter DHEA supplements are not legal in all jurisdictions, and

it is the user’s responsibility to ensure the legality of supplement usage. We do not encourage DHEA use

within jurisdictions where it is a controlled substance.

Due to an unfortunate lack of evidence specific to women, the following herbs are more speculative.

Women can take 600–675 mg of KSM-66 ashwagandha extract or 240–600 mg of Shoden ashwagandha.

The latter contains 35% withanolide glycosides, so a supplement with the equivalent amount may suffice,

but all of these doses and forms are speculative, and optimal doses aren’t yet known.

If ashwagandha proves to be insufficient:

Add 500–600 mg of fenugreek per day, divided into two doses. Optimal doses and forms aren’t yet known.

Disclaimer: Herbal supplements have the potential to interact negatively with medications and with each

other. Using multiple herbal supplements together increases the chance of adverse effects, so it may be

wise to limit how many are taken.

What has changed since the last time?

It should be noted that we changed the names of our ranking categories. “Core” (the highest) is now

“primary”; “primary” is now “secondary”; and “secondary” is now “promising”. This has already been

implemented for some guides, but this is the first update to the Testosterone Guide that uses this new

terminology. For example, if it was a core supplement in the previous issue and now it’s a secondary

supplement in this issue, we’ll say that it was a primary supplement in the previous issue and is now a

secondary supplement.

13

Added:

Fenugreek

Maca

Tribulus terrestris

Ginger

Mucuna pruriens

Changed ranking:

Vitamin D

Downgraded from primary supplement to unproven. This change reflects our new standards, which require

good evidence from randomized trials in all cases. Although vitamin D’s role is mechanistically plausible, the

trials simply haven’t demonstrated an effect, and while it makes sense to ensure normal vitamin D levels

anyway, vitamin D shouldn’t be expected to increase testosterone levels.

Zinc

Downgraded from primary to secondary due to a lack of high-quality evidence.

Ashwagandha

Upgraded from unproven to secondary. Evidence continues to accumulate, and although it’s still

preliminary, the consistency of positive effects makes us somewhat confident that ashwagandha can

increase testosterone levels.

Magnesium

Downgraded from secondary to unproven. Similar to vitamin D, despite plausibility, there is insufficient

evidence (but magnesium doesn’t seem as unlikely as vitamin D, due to the scarcity of research on the

latter).

Coleus forskohlii

Downgraded from promising to unproven. This new version of the guide puts more weight on evidence

from clinical trials and less weight on mechanistic plausibility. It may still turn out to have effects, but we

need more evidence.

Stinging nettle

Upgraded from inadvisable to unproven. There is insufficient evidence that stinging nettle is ineffective, but

there is also insufficient evidence that it is effective.

Libido enhancers and testosterone boosters

Removed. This section previously made the simple point that just because something may be a libido

enhancer doesn’t mean it boosts testosterone, using Tribulus terrestris as an example. However, we

decided to write a section on Tribulus terrestris instead.

14

Primary Supplements

Why are there no primary supplements in this
guide?

None of the supplements we reviewed for this guide qualified as primary supplements. Either the effects

were too small or only present in the case of deficiency, or the evidence wasn’t sufficient to give us a high

level of confidence.

15

Secondary Supplements

Zinc

What makes zinc a secondary supplement

Zinc, an important mineral for general health, is often marketed as a testosterone booster. However,

supplementation with zinc can only help when low testosterone levels are linked to a zinc deficiency. For

example, in a trial published in 2010, in 95 chronic renal failure patients with zinc deficiency,

supplementation with 250 mg of zinc sulfate for 6 weeks resulted in a 90% increase in testosterone

levels.[27] Similarly, in an earlier trial, in 5 older men with mild zinc deficiency, supplementation with 30 mg of

elemental zinc (from zinc gluconate) for 6 months resulted in a 93% increase in testosterone levels.[28]

Moreover, meaningful increases in testosterone levels have been observed in studies in which the

participants’ baseline serum zinc and/or testosterone levels were toward the lower end of the normal

range.[29][30] and in a study where zinc levels were not clear.[31]

 Tip: Test Testosterone Levels

There are blood tests for either free testosterone or total testosterone, which comprises free

testosterone and bound testosterone. Testosterone can be weakly bound to albumin or strongly

bound to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Testosterone bound to albumin can be freed;

testosterone bound to SHBG cannot. Only free testosterone is able to affect the body.

If serum zinc and/or T levels are already well within the normal range, supplementation with zinc is less

likely to result in meaningful increases in testosterone levels.[32] One study didn’t find an effect after

varicocelectomy either.[33]

Warnings about zinc

Zinc is considered safe for adults in amounts <40 mg/day.[34] When this level of intake is exceeded, nausea,

vomiting, stomach cramps, and even diarrhea can occur.[34]

16

 
Effects of low, adequate, and high zinc intake

At the same time, insufficient zinc intake can also cause gastrointestinal issues; it’s all about balance. If too

much zinc is taken — generally, >100 mg — for a long time, it can also decrease levels of copper, an

important mineral needed for iron absorption and red blood cell formation.[35] Chronic zinc consumption or

very high doses over a short period may also decrease the immune response[36] and reduce levels of HDL-

C.[34] Zinc can also interact with quinolone and tetracycline antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin and

doxycycline.[37][38] Taking zinc along with these antibiotics can reduce the amount of each that is absorbed.

To reduce this effect, the antibiotic should be taken at least 2 hours before or 4–6 hours after zinc.[39][40]

Other medicines, such as chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide, can increase zinc in urine, so taking these

thiazide diuretics could decrease the amount of zinc in the body.[41] Knowing what dietary supplements a

person takes is important for doctors and pharmacists so they can check for any interactions.

17

 Caution: Zinc Tolerable Upper Intake

(ULs) of Zinc in Milligrams

AGE

MALE OR FEMALE (including pregnant or lactating women)

0–6 months

7–12 months

1–3 years

4–8 years

9–13 years

14–18 years

>18 years

Reference: Zinc[34]

4

5

7

12

23

34

40

How to take zinc

First, a person should determine whether a zinc supplement is necessary. This can be done by checking

current blood plasma levels, but this test is not always the most accurate,[42] so it can be more helpful to

track food intake for a week to determine a person’s average dietary zinc intake.

If, on average, a person is getting less than 80% of the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA),

supplementation is an option, but eating more foods rich in zinc should be tried first.

 Tip: Zinc Blood Levels

Ranges

HEALTH STATUS

Severe deficiency

Deficiency

Mild deficiency

Normal

Intoxication

Reference: [64]

µmoI/L

<4.6

4.6–9.0

9.1–12.7

12.8–24.3

>24.3

μg/dL

<30

30–59

60–83

84–159

>159

In case of deficiency or severe deficiency, a medically supervised intervention is needed. Supplementing

should always be discussed with a physician first. Common medical interventions include taking a short-

term oral dose of 1–2 milligrams per kilogram of body weight per day (mg/kg/day) of elemental zinc[43]; for

18

severe deficiency, 3 mg/kg/day may be used.[44][45]

In cases of mild deficiency, 30–40 mg of elemental zinc daily for 2–4 weeks may raise zinc levels to

normal, at which point 10–20 mg/day may suffice for maintenance.

For people on the lower end of the normal range (12.8–16.7 µmoI/L; 84–109 μg/dL), 5–20 mg of elemental

zinc daily may help maintain normal levels.

For people on the higher end of the normal range (18.6–24.3 µmoI/L, 121.5–159 μg/dL), a zinc supplement

may not be necessary, but taking 5 mg of elemental zinc daily may help maintain normal levels.

In cases of zinc intoxication (which can cause serious adverse effects), zinc and zinc-containing

supplements should be avoided, unless specifically instructed by a medical professional. As always, it’s

important to first consult a physician.

If zinc levels are not known and a person cannot get them tested but are intent on supplementing with

zinc, it may be prudent to limit the dosage to 5–20 mg/day (15–25 mg/day for vegetarians and vegans).

While the RDA of zinc for adults ranges from 8 to 12 mg/day[34], any recommendation of ours above that

still falls below zinc’s Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) of 40 mg/day.[34]

Zinc sulfate and gluconate are the most researched forms of oral zinc supplements and are preferred. Zinc

citrate has comparable absorption to gluconate, whereas zinc oxide isn’t as well absorbed.[46] Zinc

picolinate and bisglycinate may have greater absorption rates than gluconate, but more research is

needed.[47][48]

Eating foods rich in phytates — namely, grains, legumes, seeds, and nuts[49][50] — at the same time as taking

a zinc supplement can reduce zinc absorption. If a person is unable to take zinc on an empty stomach, the

next best way is with some low-phytate food.

Men taking zinc may see a change in testosterone of -0.1–5.124 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) / -2.58–147.7

nanograms per deciliter (ng/dl). Greater effects are more likely when baseline zinc and testosterone levels

are lower. It is unclear to what extent zinc affects women’s testosterone levels.

DHEA

What makes DHEA a secondary supplement

The hormone dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) circulates throughout the body and can be called on to

make other hormones, notably testosterone and estrogen.[51] DHEA levels decrease with age — sometimes

drastically. Maintaining adequate DHEA levels can help support testosterone levels, libido, and sexual

function.

Numerous randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials have been conducted on supplementation with

DHEA for a variety of reasons and in a number of contexts. A meta-analysis pooled 42 studies with 55 total

arms and found that DHEA had a considerable effect on testosterone levels for both women and men.[52]

The effect was higher for doses above 50 mg compared with lower doses, and trials lasting 12 or fewer

weeks showed higher increases than longer trials did. It appeared to work for all of the participants,

19

 
including postmenopausal women, women not in menopause and with no chronic health conditions, people

with chronic health conditions, and women with androgen deficiency, though the most potent effect was

seen in the participants not in menopause and with no health conditions. Overall, the study quality has been

moderate-high by conventional measures, which is a reason for confidence in DHEA’s effects.

Warnings about DHEA

Because DHEA levels are different for everyone, adding more on top of what’s naturally there without

knowing base levels could lead to an increased risk of potentially serious side effects. Taking DHEA in

dosages higher than 50–100 mg/day or for a long time can increase levels of DHEA, estrogen,

androstenedione, and testosterone considerably, which could lead to a sex hormone imbalance and its

associated side effects.[53] DHEA has mild side effects, such as acne.[54] Other side effects vary by sex.

Women might develop masculine features, and men might experience breast tenderness/enlargement. Men

might also experience aggression or testicular wasting, depending on the amount of DHEA consumed.

Other potential side effects involve the liver,[55][56] heart,[57] or endocrine system.[58] Because DHEA can be

converted into estrogen, people with hormone-sensitive cancers, such as prostate, breast, or ovarian,

should not take the supplement. DHEA may also increase the risk of prostate, liver, breast, and pancreatic

cancers.[59][60][61][62] The supplement should not be used by pregnant or breastfeeding women, as DHEA can

cause higher than normal levels of androgens, which may be harmful to the baby. It’s wise to be cautious

when taking DHEA in combination with some medications, including anastrozole, exemestane, and

fulvestrant.[63] Talking with a doctor before adding any supplements to the diet is important.

How to take DHEA

The first step is to get tested. The body synthesizes DHEA sulfate (DHEA-S) out of DHEA. Blood levels of

DHEA can change quickly, but DHEA-S is more stable, so knowing DHEA-S levels is a good idea.

 Tip: Normal DHEA-S Ranges

(µg/dL / µmol/L)

MEN

WOMEN

108–441 / 2.92–11.91

145–395 / 3.92–10.66

280–640 / 7.56–17.28

65–380 / 1.75–10.26

120–520 / 3.24–14.04

45–270 / 1.22–7.29

95–530 / 2.56–14.31

32–240 / 0.86–6.48

70–310 / 1.89–8.37

26–200 / 0.70–5.40

42–290 / 1.13–7.83

13–130 / 0.35–3.51

28–175 / 0.76–4.72

17–90 / 0.46–2.43

AGE

18–19

20–29

30–39

40–49

50–59

60–69

>69

Reference: [65]

If levels are normal, no DHEA is needed.

20

If levels are above normal, DHEA should not be taken. Speaking to a physician is important.

If levels are below normal, supplementation with DHEA should be discussed with a physician.

Anyone who decides to supplement should try taking DHEA once a day in the morning (with food) for a

month and then getting tested again.

Men can take 20–50 mg/day.

Women can take 10–30 mg/day.

These doses should sufficiently maintain adequate DHEA levels. In cases of very low DHEA, 50 mg/day may

be needed, regardless of sex.

Men may see an increase in DHEA levels of 0.12–1.38 nmol/dl (3.6–39.91 ng/dl).

Women may see an increase of 0.79–1.18 nmol/dl (23–34 ng/dl).

Postmenopausal women may see an increase of 0.55–1.19 nmol/dl (15.8–34.3 ng/dl).

People with androgen deficiency or other chronic health conditions may see a smaller increase than people

without such diagnoses.

21

Promising Supplements

Ashwagandha

What makes ashwagandha a promising
supplement

Ashwagandha is an Ayurvedic herb known for its potential rejuvenating and vitality-enhancing properties.[66]

In animal studies, it has demonstrated potential protective effects on the testes in chronic stress and

arsenic toxicity, which may be relevant to humans.[67][68]

A number of studies have found that ashwagandha increases testosterone levels, but relatively few were

double-blind RCTs, all of which suggested only small-to-moderate increases.[69][70][71][72] The RCT sample sizes

were fairly small, and other potential sources of bias limits their ability to accurately assess testosterone

levels. The non-RCT trials also supported ashwagandha's testosterone-increasing potential.[73][74][75]

So while the quality of evidence is low, and it’s clear that the research is in its infancy, there’s a high level of

consistency that suggests testosterone increases.

Warnings about ashwagandha

Ashwagandha continues to show promising efficacy and safety data. Mild side effects reported with the

use of ashwagandha include drowsiness, upper gastrointestinal (GI) discomfort, dizziness, and loose

stools.[76] Because ashwagandha may increase testosterone levels,[71] people with hormone-sensitive

prostate cancer should avoid it. The herb’s hormonal effects could raise concern about its use during

pregnancy, but the research is mostly old, sparse, and unclear.[77] Given the lack of data, it’s safest to avoid

ashwagandha while pregnant or breastfeeding. There have also been case reports illustrating

ashwagandha’s potential link to liver injury.[78] Ashwagandha should not be taken with benzodiazepines,

anticonvulsants, or barbiturates, because all of these drugs have sedative properties, as does

ashwagandha, and combining them can increase these effects.[76] Herbs can be contaminated with arsenic,

cadmium, and lead, and ashwagandha is no different.[79] It is vitally important to purchase supplements from

a company that subjects their products to credible third-party testing for purity.

How to take ashwagandha

Due to the more preliminary nature of the evidence, there isn’t a clear optimal dose or form of

ashwagandha for increasing testosterone. The higher-quality studies used a daily dose of 600–675 mg of

the KSM-66 extract; other studies used 240–600 mg of Shoden, which contains 35% withanolide

glycosides. There were also positive — but less reliable — studies that used 5 grams of ground root

powder.

An effect-size estimate isn’t possible for ashwagandha at the moment.

22

 
Fenugreek

What makes fenugreek a promising supplement

Trigonella foenum-graecum, commonly known as fenugreek, is a plant traditionally used in India and some

Arabic regions for its purported health-promoting properties. Recently, fenugreek-seed extract has become

popular for its potential effects on testosterone levels. These effects have mainly been attributed to

steroidal saponins, a group of glycosides found in fenugreek seeds.

In men, the relatively few controlled trials looking at the effects of supplementation with fenugreek on

testosterone levels have produced mixed results. For example, one study of 96 healthy men (average age

of 56) found that supplementing with 600 mg of a standardized fenugreek seed extract for 12 weeks

increased levels: total serum testosterone by 12% and free testosterone by 9.5%. On the other hand, a study

of 84 healthy men (average age of 63) with symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (i.e., an enlarged

prostate) found that supplementation with 600 mg of the same fenugreek extract for 12 weeks had no

effects on total or free testosterone levels.

Moreover, in an 8-week study of 49 young, resistance-trained men, supplementation with 500 mg of

fenugreek seed extract (standardized to 70% trigimannose) had no effect on free testosterone. On the

other hand, another 8-week study — of 30 young, resistance-trained men — found statistically significant

increases in both total and free testosterone levels when the men supplemented with 500 mg of a different

standardized fenugreek seed extract.

Of the two available controlled trials in women, one trial reported small increases in total and free

testosterone levels, while the other trial reported a small increase in free, but not total, testosterone levels.

The majority of the relevant controlled trials have reported increases in total and/or free testosterone levels

when supplementing with fenugreek seed extract, while the remaining trials have reported null effects.

Importantly, no trials have reported statistically significant reductions in total or free testosterone. With that

said, the available trials are few, small-scale, and methodologically heterogeneous, and almost all have

been funded by manufacturers of fenugreek supplements. On the whole, evidence for fenugreek’s potential

effects on testosterone is promising, but larger-scale, higher-quality trials are needed to confirm these

effects.

Warnings about fenugreek

In commonly studied doses of up to 600 mg per day, fenugreek seed extract appears to be relatively safe.

The reported side effects are mild and include headaches and upper GI issues, such as indigestion/reflux

and stomach discomfort.

Allergies to fenugreek have been noted and appear to be associated with the Leguminosae family, so

people with an allergy to chickpeas or peanuts may also react to fenugreek.

A review on the potential toxicological properties of fenugreek reported testicular toxicity, oxidative stress,

and DNA damage in male mice and detrimental effects on fertility and pregnancy in female mice, but these

effects have not been confirmed in humans. The dose given to the mice was very high (≥50 mg/kg); based

on species conversion, the human dose would be 12.3 times higher than that.[80]

23

 
How to take fenugreek

Due to the heterogeneity (variability in study outcomes due to differences in characteristics between

studies), it’s difficult to make specific recommendations on the best form of fenugreek. With that said, most

studies have used 500–600 mg of fenugreek seed extract per day, divided into two doses, for 8–12 weeks.

In one study, the participants reported slight GI discomfort when taking the supplement on an empty

stomach, so it may be a good idea to take fenugreek with food.

Men taking a fenugreek supplement may see a change in testosterone levels of -0.24–1.90 nmol/L (-6.9–

54.8 ng/dl).

There is insufficient evidence to calculate an estimate for women.

24

Unproven Supplements

Boron

What makes boron an unproven supplement

Like magnesium and zinc, boron is a dietary mineral. As a supplement, it is sometimes recommended for

postmenopausal women with low hormone levels. Some studies have also noted an increase in testosterone

in men, including young men, taking 10 mg of boron per day, but this effect is unreliable: its magnitude

varies significantly between studies using similar dosages and methodologies.[81][82][83] More research is

needed to determine boron’s effects on hormone levels and the mechanism behind those effects.

One study on postmenopausal women failed to find a meaningful effect on testosterone levels.[84]

Coleus forskohlii

What makes Coleus forskohlii an unproven
supplement

Coleus forskohlii is an herb historically used in Ayurvedic medicine that can increase the body’s levels of

cyclic adenosine monophosphate, or cAMP, which is important for a number of hormonal processes. It

might also increase the effectiveness of other supplements that increase cAMP, such as caffeine. An

increase in cAMP levels in the testicles leads to improved testosterone synthesis.

One randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial examined the effects of a forskohlii root extract

(manufactured to contain a forskolin concentration of 10%) on testosterone concentrations in 30 young

men with overweight or obesity.[85] Daily supplementation with 500 mg for 12 weeks failed to increase total

testosterone levels but did increase free testosterone levels by a clinically irrelevant 3%. It’s worth keeping

in mind that the trial was not preregistered, did not specify primary outcomes, and was funded by the

manufacturer of the supplement.

Due to the lack of relevant clinical research, coupled with the unimpressive results of the single available

(industry-funded) trial, Coleus forskohlii is considered an unproven option.

D-aspartic acid

What makes D-aspartic acid an unproven

25

 
 
 
supplement

Theoretically, an increase in D-aspartic acid can increase testosterone through metabolism.

Reference: D’Aniello. Brain Res Rev. 2007.[86]

In reality, it is doubtful that it has any meaningful effect.

Out of six controlled clinical trials of D-aspartic acid (D-aspartate, or DAA), testosterone levels:

increased by 42% in one trial in young men

decreased by 12.5% in another trial in young, resistance-trained men (but only in the men taking 6 grams of DAA per
day, not in the men taking 3 grams per day)

stayed the same in the remaining four trials

Overall, the few available controlled trials in humans suggest either no or mixed effects of supplementation

with DAA on testosterone levels, which is why the supplement is deemed unproven.

Maca

What makes maca an unproven supplement

Maca (Lepidium meyenii) root has a reputation for increasing virility, which has led to speculation about its

effects on testosterone.

None of the trials that have examined maca’s effect on testosterone levels have found convincing evidence

26

 
of a meaningful increase.[87][88][89][90] It is likely that this confusion stems from maca having an effect on libido,

which is incorrectly interpreted as/attributed to an increase in testosterone.[91]

Magnesium

What makes magnesium an unproven
supplement

Older men with low magnesium levels tend to have lower testosterone levels, and this even holds true when

adjusted for age, which rules out the likelihood that age influences both.[92][93][94]

Studies show magnesium plays a role in the functioning of androgenic enzymes in the testes, but this

research was done on rats;[95] reliable human studies are generally lacking. One trial found an increase in

free and total testosterone when supplementing with magnesium sulfate to achieve 10 mg/kg, but the

difference between groups didn’t reach statistical significance, and the evidence is very preliminary.[96] The

increase in free testosterone is plausible, because magnesium seems to compete for sex hormone–binding

globulin, which reduces testosterone binding. Nonetheless, evidence is insufficient to substantiate the

potential effects of magnesium.

There was no effect for women with polycystic ovary syndrome when taking 250 mg of magnesium oxide,

but again, this is very preliminary evidence.[97]

Who is more likely to have low magnesium levels?

Older people tend to have relatively low magnesium intakes[98] and may absorb less during digestion.[99]

People who sweat a lot lose magnesium through sweat. Athletes who participate in sports that require weight
control may be especially vulnerable.

People with type 2 diabetes are at much higher risk for low magnesium. In developed countries, magnesium
deficiency is estimated to affect less than 15% of adults without diabetes but up to 50% of adults with type 2
diabetes.[100]

Reference: USDA FoodData Central Database. Accessed September 27, 2019.

https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000381.htm](https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/

In addition, certain diuretics[101], [proton pump inhibitors), and the antifungal medication amphotericin B can

cause significant magnesium loss.[102]. However, potassium-sparing diuretics may not lower magnesium.

These include amiloride/Midamor, eplerenone/Inspra, spironolactone/Aldactone, and

triamterene/Dyrenium.[102]

Tribulus terrestris

What makes Tribulus terrestris an unproven
supplement

27

 
 
Tribulus terrestris is an herb that frequently appears in supplements purported to increase testosterone

levels, and there are trials that suggest some of these products may be effective.[103][104][105] However, the

possible efficacy of multi-ingredient supplements containing Tribulus should not be construed as evidence

for Tribulus having a testosterone-increasing effect, because other ingredients could be responsible.

Randomized trials that only use Tribulus terrestris tell a different story. Trials lasting 3–5 weeks have failed

to find a meaningful effect in men overall,[106][107][108] as have studies in men with sexual problems, such as

erectile dysfunction or oligozoospermia (i.e., low sperm count).[109][110][111] The one positive study was in men

with hypogonadism (i.e., diminished function in the testes); although it might be tempting to think Tribulus

works in that context, the increase was moderate, and more studies are needed before we can be confident

in that finding.[112]

In women, two randomized trials on hypoactive sexual desire disorder (i.e., low sex drive) found an increase

in total and free testosterone.[113][114] But the research is preliminary, and there are still uncertainties

surrounding its usefulness and in which contexts it would apply.

Stinging nettle

What makes Stinging nettle an unproven
supplement

Only one trial has tested stinging nettle and testosterone, and it failed to find a meaningful effect over 18

months.[115] The participants had benign prostatic hyperplasia (i.e., enlarged prostate), so it’s possible that

different effects would be seen for participants in other contexts. Nonetheless, there’s no support for

stinging nettle in clinical trials.

Ginger

What makes ginger an unproven supplement

Only one human trial — in 75 men, ages 19–40, with infertility — has looked at the effects of ginger on

testosterone. It reported a 19% increase in testosterone levels after three months of supplementation with

ginger.

However, there are several issues in methodology that greatly reduce our confidence in the results. The

study:

Was not preregistered

Did not specify primary outcomes

Included multiple outcomes without making statistical adjustments for multiple comparisons

Did not have a control group

Did not provide any information on the supplement form, dose, or intake schedule

28

 
 
Also, the researchers did not disclose if there were any conflicts of interest or how the study was funded.

Moreover, one trial, even if conducted rigorously, is insufficient.

Mucuna pruriens

What makes Mucuna pruriens an unproven
supplement

Mucuna pruriens, also known as velvet bean, is a tropical legume native to Africa and tropical Asia that has

traditionally been used as an aphrodisiac and to improve fertility in men. Its potential to increase

testosterone has been attributed, at least in part, to its high content of L-DOPA, a direct precursor to the

neurotransmitter dopamine.[116]

The effects of Mucuna pruriens on testosterone have been examined in two clinical trials[117][116] on men ages

20–45 with infertility. For 3 months, the participants took 5 grams per day of Mucuna pruriens dried seed

powder mixed with milk. In both studies, total testosterone levels significantly increased from baseline, with

the greatest increases (+43%) observed in men with oligozoospermia.

However, it should be noted that the studies were conducted by the same research lab, were not

preregistered, did not allocate participants to the treatment groups randomly, and included multiple

outcomes without making statistical adjustments for multiple comparisons. The researchers did not disclose

whether they had any conflicts of interest or how the study was funded either. It’s also worth keeping in

mind that it’s unclear whether the studies were completely separate or if the 2011 study included data on

testosterone from the 2009 study.

Because of the above issues and the small number of trials, Mucuna pruriens is considered an unproven

supplement until more research becomes available.

Vitamin D

What makes vitamin D an unproven
supplement

The older a person gets, the less efficient the body becomes at synthesizing vitamin D. In addition, it’s likely

that less time is spent outside, less vitamin D is obtained through foods, and more belly fat is carried (which

has been linked to vitamin D deficiency).[118][119] Because vitamin D plays a role in the regulation of

testosterone (T) production,[120][121][122] it’s logical that maintaining adequate D levels can help ensure

adequate T levels,[123][124][125] but studies don’t reflect that.

FOR MEN

29

 
 
The research simply hasn’t shown meaningful effects. Several studies showed either no increase in T levels

or an elevation in T by 1.15 nmol/L (33.17 ng/dL) at most.[126][127][128][129][130][131][132][133] Even in the case of low

vitamin D levels and low T, there was no effect on average levels.

Similarly, supplemental D3 had little to no effect on free testosterone or sex hormone binding–globulin

(SHBG) in people with insufficient vitamin D levels.[127][132][131][130][126][134][124][129]

Why, then, if vitamin D plays a role in testosterone production, does supplementation not work, even in

cases of low vitamin D levels? Probably because low levels doesn’t mean no T levels, and it’s possible that

testosterone production at even low levels is sufficient to regulate testosterone levels. The body will also

prioritize its most essential processes when it’s lacking something, at the expense of other processes.

FOR WOMEN WITH PCOS

Most women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) have elevated levels of androgen hormones, including

testosterone, free testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and DHEA sulfate (DHEAS).[135] These

elevated levels can cause body-hair growth, acne flare-ups, and a type of hair loss more consistent with

male pattern hair loss than female pattern hair loss.

As with men, vitamin D plays a role in female testosterone regulation. The T levels of adult females normally

range from 0.7 to 2.08 nmol/L (20–60 ng/dL), with the lowest levels typically seen during the follicular

phase.[136] Levels above this range are an indicator of PCOS.

 Tip: Testosterone Levels For Women

Assessing testosterone levels in women

In 10 randomized trials of 1,077 women with PCOS, the average effect of supplementation with D3 was

moderate, with the overall decrease in testosterone spanning from −0.26 to −0.62 nmol/L (−7.59 to −17.85

ng/dL).[137][138][139][140][141][142][143][144][145][146]

The effect was larger in the participants who took D3 along with PCOS drug treatments.

Vitamin D + PCOS drugs: −0.29 to −0.76 nmol/L (−8.36 to −21.92 ng/dL)[138][140][144][145]

Vitamin D alone: 0.00 to −0.52 nmol/L (−0.09 to −15.00 ng/dL)[137][139][141][142][143][146]

30

Additionally, the effect was modified by vitamin D status. The participants who had insufficient vitamin D at

baseline (<20 ng/mL / <50 nmol/L) experienced greater improvements in T.

Most of the trial participants also took prescription drugs, which is common for this condition. Drug

cotreatments included:

Calcitriol (Rocaltrol)

Clomiphene (Clomid, Milophene, Serophene)

Metformin (Fortamet, Glucophage, Glumetza)

Pioglitazone (Actos, Oseni)

Spironolactone (Aldactone, CaroSpir)

31

Inadvisable Supplements

Creatine

What makes creatine an inadvisable
supplement

Three RCTs of 60 active young men showed small hormonal increases — one in DHT[147] and the other two

in testosterone[148][149] These studies are commonly cited to support the position that creatine can increase

testosterone, but the increases were very small and left the participants well within normal ranges.

Ten other RCTs (218 total participants, all men) showed no effect, positive or negative, across many study

durations (6 days to 10 weeks) and doses (3–25 grams).[147][150][151][152][153][154][155][156][157][158] To date, there are no

studies in men with abnormally low testosterone levels or in women. Given the largely negative research

results seen in men, it can be hypothesized that creatine supplementation is unlikely to affect testosterone

levels in women.

Lifting weights causes a short-lived increase in testosterone production,[159][160] and creatine allows a person

to lift heavier weights, so fueling a workout with creatine could theoretically translate to a greater increase

in testosterone. But evidence to date indicates it is unlikely to have a meaningful effect on testosterone

levels.

BETWEEN-
GROUPS
EFFECT

A summary of creatine–testosterone studies

STUDY

SAMPLE
SIZE

POPULATION

AVERAGE
AGE

DURATION

DOSE

EFFECT ON
TESTOSTERONE

Active men

Trained men

20

20

1 week

20 g/day

6 days

20 g/day

↑

↑

Significant

Arazi 2015

Vatani 2011

van der
Merwe
2009

Mixed results

20

20

20

No effect

Cook 2011

10

Male rugby
players

Male rugby
players

18

3 weeks

20

10 weeks

25 g/day loading 

↑ DHT 

then 5 g/day
maintenance

 Test

4.5 grams and 9
grams

20 g/day loading 

then 0.1 g/kg
3×/week (avg. 8.8
g/day)

3 g/day HMB* + 3
g/day creatine

Cooke 2014

20

Active men

61

12 weeks

Crowe
2003

28

Male rugby
players

25

6 weeks

Eijnde 2001

11

Untrained
men

20

8 days

20 g/day

32

 
BETWEEN-
GROUPS
EFFECT

STUDY

SAMPLE
SIZE

POPULATION

AVERAGE
AGE

DURATION

DOSE

EFFECT ON
TESTOSTERONE

Faraji 2010

20

Hoffman
2006

Rhimi 2010

Tyka
2015**

Volek 1997

33

27

19

13

Male
sprinters

Male football
players

21

1 week

20 g/day

College

10 weeks

10.5 g/day

Trained men

21

1 week

20 g/day

Male runners

19–30***

6 weeks

0.07 g/kg of lean
body mass

Active men

23

1 week

25 g/day

Volek 2004

17

Trained men

21

6 weeks

20 g/day loading 

then 4 g/day
maintenance

* While there was no creatine-only group, studies have not shown HMB (beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate) to independently

affect testosterone.[161][162][163][164]

** This study used creatine malate instead of creatine monohydrate.

*** This study reported an age range but not an average age. 

33

FAQ

Q. What about the supplements not covered in
this guide?

Our guides are regularly updated, often with new supplements. We prioritize assessing (and reassessing)

the most popular of them and those most likely to work. However, if there is a specific supplement you’d

like to see covered in a future update, please let us know by filling out this survey.

Q. Can I add a supplement not covered in this
guide to my combo?

Supplement with your current combo for a few weeks before attempting any change. Talk to your physician

and research each potential addition. Check for known negative interactions with other supplements and

pharmaceuticals in your current combo, but also for synergies. If two supplements are synergistic or

additive in their effects, you might want to use lower doses of each.

Q. Can I modify the recommended doses?

If a supplement has a recommended dose range, stay within that range. If a supplement has a precise

recommended dose, stay within 10% of that dose. Taking more than recommended could be

counterproductive or even dangerous. Taking less could render the supplement ineffective, yet starting with

half the regular dose could be prudent — especially if you know you tend to react strongly to supplements

or pharmaceuticals.

Q. At what time should I take my supplements?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Starting with half the regular dose can help

minimize the harm a supplement may cause when taken during the day (e.g., fatigue) or in the evening (e.g.,

insomnia).

Q. Should I take my supplements with or
without food?

The answer is provided in the “How to take” section of a supplement entry whenever the evidence permits.

Too often, however, the evidence is either mixed or absent. Besides, a supplement’s digestion, absorption,

and metabolism can be affected differently by different foods. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), for

instance, are better absorbed with a small meal containing fat than with a large meal containing little to no

fat.

34

 
Q. What are DRI, RDA, AI, and UL?

The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) is a system of nutrition recommendations designed by the Institute of

Medicine (a US institution now known as the Health and Medicine Division). RDA, AI, and UL are part of this

system.

Contrary to what the name suggests, a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) doesn’t represent

an ideal amount; it represents the minimum you need in order to avoid deficiency-related health

issues. More precisely, it represents an amount just large enough to meet the minimum requirements

of 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages — which implies that the RDA is too low for

2.5% of healthy people.

The Adequate Intake (AI) is like the RDA, except that the number is more uncertain.

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the maximum safe amount. More precisely, it is the

maximum daily amount deemed to be safe for 97.5% of healthy males and females over all ages —

which implies that the UL is too high for 2.5% of healthy people.

As a general rule, a healthy diet should include at least the RDA of each nutrient — but less than this

nutrient’s UL. This rule has many exceptions, though. For instance, people who sweat more need more salt

(i.e., sodium), whereas people who take metformin (a diabetes medicine) need more vitamin B12.

Moreover, the DRIs are based on the median weight of adults and children in the United States. Everything

else being equal (notably age, sex, and percentage of body fat), you likely need a lesser amount of

nutrients if you weigh less, and vice versa if you weigh more. The numbers, however, are not proportional

— if only because the brains of two people of very different weights have very similar needs. So you can’t

just double your RDIs for each nutrient if you weigh twice as much as the median adult of your age and sex

(even if we overlook that people weighing the same can differ in many respects, notably body fat).

Q. I have an iron stomach. I have never felt
nauseous from supplements. Do I still need to
take precautions to avoid gastrointestinal
upset?

If you have never had any issues with nausea or vomiting, you may have an easier time ingesting large

doses of certain supplements. Nevertheless, it is not a good idea to disregard the warnings on a product.

Q. I took 350 mg of supplemental magnesium
and experienced diarrhea. Why is that?

If magnesium is indeed the culprit, then your diarrhea was probably caused by too large a dose reaching

the colon. Alternatively, it could mean that your body’s levels of magnesium are in fact sufficient, making

supplementation unnecessary.

35

 
In the future, split your daily dose into multiple doses. If the problem persists, reduce your daily dose to

200 mg. If you are using magnesium oxide, switch to a different form of magnesium.

Q. What’s the difference between elemental
magnesium/zinc and other kinds of
magnesium/zinc?

“Elemental” refers to the weight of the mineral by itself, separately from the compound bound to it. For

instance, ingesting 500 mg of magnesium gluconate means ingesting 27 mg of elemental magnesium.

Product labels display the elemental dosage. On a label, “27 mg of magnesium (as magnesium gluconate)”

means 27 mg of elemental magnesium (and 473 mg of gluconic acid).

Q. Since the body can use DHEA to make
estrogen, shouldn’t males avoid supplementing
it?

In addition to being a signaling molecule in and of itself, DHEA is the precursor to androgens and estrogens.

Therefore, yes, DHEA may increase estrogens levels in men, depending on various factors, such as an

individual’s overall levels of androgens and estrogens. However, feminizing effects haven’t been reported.

Q. Will diet affect my testosterone levels?

Yes, and in too many ways to count! To tackle the big issues, though, you should keep in mind that diets

very low in calories or fat are likely to reduce your testosterone over time. Additionally, a diet that leads to

fat gain will also decrease testosterone production.

Q. Will ejaculation decrease my testosterone
levels?

Ejaculation results in changes in prolactin (increase) and dopamine (temporary decrease) but does not

result in changes in testosterone. Although prolactin and dopamine are both involved with testosterone,

they do not appear to influence testosterone levels acutely.

Q. Will sleep affect my testosterone levels?

Lack of sleep causes numerous health issues. Notably, it can decrease testosterone

production[165][166][167][168][169] and facilitate fat gain[170] (and fat gain itself can impair testosterone production).

Getting enough quality sleep will help support healthy testosterone levels.

Q. Will exercise increase my testosterone

36

levels?

Resistance training can temporarily raise testosterone levels for 15–30 minutes post-exercise.[159][160] More

importantly, it can benefit testosterone production in the long run by improving body composition and

reducing insulin resistance.[159]

Overtraining, however, is counterproductive. Prolonged endurance exercise especially can cause your

testosterone to drop.[20][171] Ensuring adequate recovery time will help you receive the full benefits of

physical activity.

Q. Will gaining fat decrease my testosterone
levels?

Fat gain and the associated increase in chronic disease risk, such as cardiovascular disease and type 2

diabetes, are strongly linked to decreases in testosterone, particularly in middle-aged and older

men.[172][12][173]

If you gain weight (as fat), your testosterone production drops. Fortunately, if you lose weight, your

testosterone production can climb back up.

37

 
Effect of weight loss on testosterone levels

Reference: Grossmann and Matsumoto. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017.[174]

A meta-analysis of 24 RCTs looked at weight loss caused by diet or bariatric surgery.[175]

In the diet studies, the average 9.8% weight loss was linked to a testosterone increase of 2.9 nmol/L (84

ng/dL). In the bariatric-surgery studies, the average 32% weight loss was linked to a testosterone increase

of 8.7 nmol/L (251 ng/dL).

You need not lose huge amounts of weight to see a bump in testosterone levels, either: a 5% loss in weight

may increase total testosterone by 2 nmol/L (58 ng/dL).[176]

Q. Will soy decrease testosterone levels in
males?

Phytoestrogens are plant compounds structurally similar to estradiol, the main estrogen in males and

premenopausal females. Because soy contains isoflavones, a type of phytoestrogen, concern has been

raised about soy affecting male health.

38

To this day, two case reports have documented adverse effects (gynecomastia, hypogonadism, reduced

libido, and erectile dysfunction) from an estimated 360 mg of soy isoflavones per day for 6–12 months.

However, a meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials (RCTs, a much higher level of evidence than

case reports) found that males’ levels of total and free testosterone were not notably affected by either

60–240 mg of isoflavones or 10–70 grams of soy protein per day.

Accordingly, a couple of scoops of soy protein powder are unlikely to have estrogenic effects in males. If

you’d like to take more, however, look for a soy protein concentrate or isolate produced through the

alcohol-wash method, which dramatically lowers the isoflavone content.[177]

Keep in mind that the isoflavone content of different soy products can vary depending on several factors,

such as the variety of soybeans used, differences in growing and storage conditions, and differential food

processing techniques employed.[178] You can see how it varies below.

39

Isoflavone content of common soy foods

Reference: USDA FoodData Central Databases. Accessed Jan 18, 2019. URL: https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/

40

References

1.   Davis SR, Wahlin-Jacobsen S Testosterone in women--the clinical significance. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. (2015 Dec)

2.   Haider A, Zitzmann M, Doros G, Isbarn H, Hammerer P, Yassin A Incidence of prostate cancer in hypogonadal men receiving

testosterone therapy: observations from 5-year median followup of 3 registries. J Urol. (2015 Jan)

3.   Coward RM, Simhan J, Carson CC 3rd Prostate-specific antigen changes and prostate cancer in hypogonadal men treated

with testosterone replacement therapy. BJU Int. (2009 May)

4.   Jin B, Conway AJ, Handelsman DJ Effects of androgen deficiency and replacement on prostate zonal volumes. Clin Endocrinol

(Oxf). (2001 Apr)

5.   Eisenberg ML Testosterone Replacement Therapy and Prostate Cancer Incidence. World J Mens Health. (2015 Dec)

6.   Chrysohoou C, Panagiotakos D, Pitsavos C, Siasos G, Oikonomou E, Varlas J, Patialiakas A, Lazaros G, Psaltopoulou T,

Zaromitidou M, Kourkouti P, Tousoulis D, Stefanadis C Low total testosterone levels are associated with the metabolic syndrome
in elderly men: the role of body weight, lipids, insulin resistance, and inflammation; the Ikaria study. Rev Diabet Stud. (2013
Spring)

7.   Rivas AM, Mulkey Z, Lado-Abeal J, Yarbrough S Diagnosing and managing low serum testosterone. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent).

(2014 Oct)

8.   Travison TG, Vesper HW, Orwoll E, Wu F, Kaufman JM, Wang Y, Lapauw B, Fiers T, Matsumoto AM, Bhasin S Harmonized

Reference Ranges for Circulating Testosterone Levels in Men of Four Cohort Studies in the United States and Europe. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. (2017 Apr 1)

9.   Travison TG, Araujo AB, O'Donnell AB, Kupelian V, McKinlay JB A population-level decline in serum testosterone levels in

American men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2007 Jan)

10.   Le M, Flores D, May D, Gourley E, Nangia AK Current Practices of Measuring and Reference Range Reporting of Free and Total

Testosterone in the United States. J Urol. (2016 May)

11.   Feldman HA, Longcope C, Derby CA, Johannes CB, Araujo AB, Coviello AD, Bremner WJ, McKinlay JB Age trends in the level of

serum testosterone and other hormones in middle-aged men: longitudinal results from the Massachusetts male aging study. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2002 Feb)

12.   Tajar A, Forti G, O'Neill TW, Lee DM, Silman AJ, Finn JD, Bartfai G, Boonen S, Casanueva FF, Giwercman A, Han TS, Kula K,

Labrie F, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Vanderschueren D, Huhtaniemi IT, Wu FC, EMAS Group Characteristics of secondary,
primary, and compensated hypogonadism in aging men: evidence from the European Male Ageing Study. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. (2010 Apr)

13.   Siparsky PN, Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE Jr Muscle changes in aging: understanding sarcopenia. Sports Health. (2014 Jan)

14.   Keller K, Engelhardt M Strength and muscle mass loss with aging process. Age and strength loss. Muscles Ligaments Tendons

J. (2014 Feb 24)

15.   Sun F, Norman IJ, While AE Physical activity in older people: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. (2013 May 6)

16.   Akune T, Muraki S, Oka H, Tanaka S, Kawaguchi H, Nakamura K, Yoshimura N Exercise habits during middle age are

associated with lower prevalence of sarcopenia: the ROAD study. Osteoporos Int. (2014 Mar)

17.   Emmelot-Vonk MH, Verhaar HJ, Nakhai-Pour HR, Grobbee DE, van der Schouw YT Low testosterone concentrations and the
symptoms of testosterone deficiency according to the Androgen Deficiency in Ageing Males (ADAM) and Ageing Males'
Symptoms rating scale (AMS) questionnaires. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). (2011 Apr)

18.   Wang C, Jackson G, Jones TH, Matsumoto AM, Nehra A, Perelman MA, Swerdloff RS, Traish A, Zitzmann M, Cunningham G
Low testosterone associated with obesity and the metabolic syndrome contributes to sexual dysfunction and cardiovascular
disease risk in men with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. (2011 Jul)

19.   Khera M Patients with testosterone deficit syndrome and depression. Arch Esp Urol. (2013 Sep)

20.   Daly W, Seegers CA, Rubin DA, Dobridge JD, Hackney AC Relationship between stress hormones and testosterone with

prolonged endurance exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol. (2005 Jan)

21.   Nakamura D, Yanagiba Y, Duan Z, Ito Y, Okamura A, Asaeda N, Tagawa Y, Li C, Taya K, Zhang SY, Naito H, Ramdhan DH,

Kamijima M, Nakajima T Bisphenol A may cause testosterone reduction by adversely affecting both testis and pituitary systems
similar to estradiol. Toxicol Lett. (2010 Apr 15)

22.   Morgentaler A, Traish AM Shifting the paradigm of testosterone and prostate cancer: the saturation model and the limits of

androgen-dependent growth. Eur Urol. (2009 Feb)

23.   Konieczna A, Rutkowska A, Rachoń D Health risk of exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA). Rocz Panstw Zakl Hig. (2015)

24.   Hartle JC, Navas-Acien A, Lawrence RS The consumption of canned food and beverages and urinary Bisphenol A

concentrations in NHANES 2003-2008. Environ Res. (2016 Oct)

25.   Russo G, Barbato F, Grumetto L Monitoring of bisphenol A and bisphenol S in thermal paper receipts from the Italian market

and estimated transdermal human intake: A pilot study. Sci Total Environ. (2017 Dec 1)

26.   Yang CZ, Yaniger SI, Jordan VC, Klein DJ, Bittner GD Most plastic products release estrogenic chemicals: a potential health

41

problem that can be solved. Environ Health Perspect. (2011 Jul)

27.   Ghanbarali Raeis Jalali, Jamshid Roozbeh, Azam Mohammadzadeh, Maryam Sharifian, Mohammad Mahdi Sagheb, Alireza
Hamidian Jahromi, Sanaz Shabani, Fariborz Ghaffarpasand, Raha Afshariani Impact of oral zinc therapy on the level of sex
hormones in male patients on hemodialysis. Ren Fail. (2010 May)

28.   Prasad AS, Mantzoros CS, Beck FW, Hess JW, Brewer GJ Zinc status and serum testosterone levels of healthy adults. Nutrition.

(1996 May)

29.   Netter A, Hartoma R, Nahoul K Effect of zinc administration on plasma testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, and sperm count.

Arch Androl. (1981 Aug)

30.   Prasad AS, Abbasi AA, Rabbani P, DuMouchelle E Effect of zinc supplementation on serum testosterone level in adult male

sickle cell anemia subjects.. Am J Hematol. (1981)

31.   Shafiei Neek L, Gaeini AA, Choobineh S Effect of zinc and selenium supplementation on serum testosterone and plasma lactate

in cyclist after an exhaustive exercise bout. Biol Trace Elem Res. (2011 Dec)

32.   Schäfer M, Mies R, Vlaho M Zinc substitution for male dialysis patients: positive effect on preexisting hypogonadism?. Contrib

Nephrol. (1984)

33.   Nematollahi-Mahani SN, Azizollahi GH, Baneshi MR, Safari Z, Azizollahi S Effect of folic acid and zinc sulphate on endocrine

parameters and seminal antioxidant level after varicocelectomy.. Andrologia. (2014-Apr)

34.   Institute of Medicine (US) Panel on Micronutrients Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron,

Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc.

35.   Duncan A, Yacoubian C, Watson N, Morrison I The risk of copper deficiency in patients prescribed zinc supplements. J Clin

Pathol. (2015 Sep)

36.   Shankar AH, Prasad AS Zinc and immune function: the biological basis of altered resistance to infection.. Am J Clin Nutr.

(1998-Aug)

37.   Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR Absorption interactions with fluoroquinolones. 1995 update.. Drug Saf. (1995-May)

38.   Penttilä O, Hurme H, Neuvonen PJ Effect of zinc sulphate on the absorption of tetracycline and doxycycline in man.. Eur J Clin

Pharmacol. (1975-Dec-19)

39.   Blondeau JM Expanded activity and utility of the new fluoroquinolones: a review.. Clin Ther. (1999-Jan)

40.   Beauduy CE & Winston LG Basic & clinical pharmacology, chapter 46: sulfonamides, trimethoprim, & quinolones.

41.   Wester PO Urinary zinc excretion during treatment with different diuretics.. Acta Med Scand. (1980)

42.   Maret W, Sandstead HH Zinc requirements and the risks and benefits of zinc supplementation. J Trace Elem Med Biol. (2006)

43.   Kleinman, RE, and Greer, FR Pediatric nutrition: Policy of the American Academy of Pediatrics.

44.   Maverakis E, Fung MA, Lynch PJ, Draznin M, Michael DJ, Ruben B, Fazel N Acrodermatitis enteropathica and an overview of

zinc metabolism. J Am Acad Dermatol. (2007 Jan)

45.   Neldner KH, Hambidge KM Zinc therapy of acrodermatitis enteropathica. N Engl J Med. (1975 Apr 24)

46.   Wegmüller R, Tay F, Zeder C, Brnic M, Hurrell RF Zinc absorption by young adults from supplemental zinc citrate is comparable

with that from zinc gluconate and higher than from zinc oxide. J Nutr. (2014 Feb)

47.   Barrie SA, Wright JV, Pizzorno JE, Kutter E, Barron PC Comparative absorption of zinc picolinate, zinc citrate and zinc

gluconate in humans. Agents Actions. (1987 Jun)

48.   Gandia P, Bour D, Maurette JM, Donazzolo Y, Duchène P, Béjot M, Houin G A bioavailability study comparing two oral
formulations containing zinc (Zn bis-glycinate vs. Zn gluconate) after a single administration to twelve healthy female
volunteers. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. (2007 Jul)

49.   Bel-Serrat S, Stammers AL, Warthon-Medina M, Moran VH, Iglesia-Altaba I, Hermoso M, Moreno LA, Lowe NM, EURRECA

Network Factors that affect zinc bioavailability and losses in adult and elderly populations. Nutr Rev. (2014 May)

50.   Schlemmer U, Frølich W, Prieto RM, Grases F Phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing,

bioavailability, protective role and analysis. Mol Nutr Food Res. (2009 Sep)

51.   Sato K, Iemitsu M The Role of Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in Skeletal Muscle. Vitam Horm. (2018)

52.   Li Y, Ren J, Li N, Liu J, Tan SC, Low TY, Ma Z A dose-response and meta-analysis of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
supplementation on testosterone levels: perinatal prediction of randomized clinical trials.. Exp Gerontol. (2020-Nov)

53.   Morales AJ, Haubrich RH, Hwang JY, Asakura H, Yen SS The effect of six months treatment with a 100 mg daily dose of

dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) on circulating sex steroids, body composition and muscle strength in age-advanced men and
women.. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). (1998-Oct)

54.   van Vollenhoven RF, Morabito LM, Engleman EG, McGuire JL Treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus with

dehydroepiandrosterone: 50 patients treated up to 12 months.. J Rheumatol. (1998-Feb)

55.   Kocis P Prasterone.. Am J Health Syst Pharm. (2006-Nov-15)

56.   Yeung TW, Li RH, Lee VC, Ho PC, Ng EH A randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled trial on the effect of

dehydroepiandrosterone for 16 weeks on ovarian response markers in women with primary ovarian insufficiency.. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. (2013-Jan)

42

57.   Sahelian R, Borken S Dehydroepiandrosterone and cardiac arrhythmia.. Ann Intern Med. (1998-Oct-01)

58.   Mortola JF, Yen SS The effects of oral dehydroepiandrosterone on endocrine-metabolic parameters in postmenopausal

women.. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (1990-Sep)

59.   Calhoun KE, Pommier RF, Muller P, Fletcher WS, Toth-Fejel S Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate causes proliferation of estrogen

receptor-positive breast cancer cells despite treatment with fulvestrant.. Arch Surg. (2003-Aug)

60.   Acacio BD, Stanczyk FZ, Mullin P, Saadat P, Jafarian N, Sokol RZ Pharmacokinetics of dehydroepiandrosterone and its

metabolites after long-term daily oral administration to healthy young men.. Fertil Steril. (2004-Mar)

61.   P Ebeling, V A Koivisto Physiological importance of dehydroepiandrosterone. Lancet. (1994 Jun 11)

62.   Tagliaferro AR, Roebuck BD, Ronan AM, Meeker LD Enhancement of pancreatic carcinogenesis by dehydroepiandrosterone..

Adv Exp Med Biol. (1992)

63.   Morris KT, Toth-Fejel S, Schmidt J, Fletcher WS, Pommier RF High dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate predicts breast cancer

progression during new aromatase inhibitor therapy and stimulates breast cancer cell growth in tissue culture: a renewed role
for adrenalectomy.. Surgery. (2001-Dec)

64.   Yanagisawa Zinc deficiency and clinical practice. Japan Medical Association Journal. (2004)

65.   DHEA-sulfate test. Medline Plus.gov. (Last updated January 6, 2020; accessed February 6, 2020)

66.   Singh N, Bhalla M, de Jager P, Gilca M An overview on ashwagandha: a Rasayana (rejuvenator) of Ayurveda.. Afr J Tradit

Complement Altern Med. (2011)

67.   Kumar A, Kumar R, Rahman MS, Iqubal MA, Anand G, Niraj PK, Ali M Phytoremedial effect of Withania somnifera against

arsenic-induced testicular toxicity in Charles Foster rats.. Avicenna J Phytomed. (2015)

68.   Nirupama M. and Yajurvedi H.N. Efficacy of ashwagandha *(Withania somnifera L.)* root extracts in preventing stress-induced

testicular damage in rats. European J Biomed Pharm. (2015)

69.   Lopresti AL, Smith SJ, Malvi H, Kodgule R An investigation into the stress-relieving and pharmacological actions of an

ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Medicine (Baltimore). (2019
Sep)

70.   Ambiye VR, Langade D, Dongre S, Aptikar P, Kulkarni M, Dongre A Clinical Evaluation of the Spermatogenic Activity of the Root
Extract of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) in Oligospermic Males: A Pilot Study. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med.
(2013)

71.   Adrian L Lopresti, Peter D Drummond, Stephen J Smith A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Study
Examining the Hormonal and Vitality Effects of Ashwagandha ( Withania somnifera) in Aging, Overweight Males. Am J Mens
Health. (Mar-Apr 2019)

72.   Wankhede S, Langade D, Joshi K, Sinha SR, Bhattacharyya S Examining the effect of Withania somnifera supplementation on

muscle strength and recovery: a randomized controlled trial. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. (2015 Nov 25)

73.   Abbas Ali Mahdi, Kamla Kant Shukla, Mohammad Kaleem Ahmad, Singh Rajender, Satya Narain Shankhwar, Vishwajeet Singh,
Deepansh Dalela Withania somnifera Improves Semen Quality in Stress-Related Male Fertility. Evid Based Complement Alternat
Med. (2009 Sep 29)

74.   Gupta A, Mahdi AA, Shukla KK, Ahmad MK, Bansal N, Sankhwar P, Sankhwar SN Efficacy of Withania somnifera on seminal

plasma metabolites of infertile males: a proton NMR study at 800 MHz. J Ethnopharmacol. (2013 Aug 26)

75.   Ahmad MK, Mahdi AA, Shukla KK, Islam N, Rajender S, Madhukar D, Shankhwar SN, Ahmad S Withania somnifera improves

semen quality by regulating reproductive hormone levels and oxidative stress in seminal plasma of infertile males. Fertil Steril.
(2010 Aug)

76.   Tandon N, Yadav SS Safety and clinical effectiveness of Withania Somnifera (Linn.) Dunal root in human ailments.. J

Ethnopharmacol. (2020-Jun-12)

77.   Gardner Z., McGuffin M., Upton R., et al American Herbal Products Association&#039;s botanical safety handbook, 2nd edition.

78.   Björnsson HK, Björnsson ES, Avula B, Khan IA, Jonasson JG, Ghabril M, Hayashi PH, Navarro V Ashwagandha-induced liver

injury: A case series from Iceland and the US Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network.. Liver Int. (2020-Apr)

79.   Bais S., and Chandewar A. Toxicological standardization marketed ashwagandha formulations by atomic absorption

spectroscopy. Asian J Pharm Clin Res. (2013)

80.   Nair AB, Jacob S A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and human. J Basic Clin Pharm. (2016 Mar)

81.   Ferrando AA, Green NR The effect of boron supplementation on lean body mass, plasma testosterone levels, and strength in

male bodybuilders.. Int J Sport Nutr. (1993-Jun)

82.   Naghii MR, Samman S The effect of boron supplementation on its urinary excretion and selected cardiovascular risk factors in

healthy male subjects.. Biol Trace Elem Res. (1997-Mar)

83.   Naghii MR, Mofid M, Asgari AR, Hedayati M, Daneshpour MS Comparative effects of daily and weekly boron supplementation

on plasma steroid hormones and proinflammatory cytokines. J Trace Elem Med Biol. (2011 Jan)

84.   Beattie JH, Peace HS The influence of a low-boron diet and boron supplementation on bone, major mineral and sex steroid

metabolism in postmenopausal women.. Br J Nutr. (1993-May)

85.   Godard MP, Johnson BA, Richmond SR Body composition and hormonal adaptations associated with forskolin consumption in

43

overweight and obese men. Obes Res. (2005 Aug)

86.   D'Aniello A D-Aspartic acid: an endogenous amino acid with an important neuroendocrine role. Brain Res Rev. (2007 Feb)

87.   Melnikovova I, Fait T, Kolarova M, Fernandez EC, Milella L Effect of Lepidium meyenii Walp. on Semen Parameters and Serum
Hormone Levels in Healthy Adult Men: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Study. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med. (2015)

88.   Zenico T, Cicero AF, Valmorri L, Mercuriali M, Bercovich E Subjective effects of Lepidium meyenii (Maca) extract on well-being
and sexual performances in patients with mild erectile dysfunction: a randomised, double-blind clinical trial. Andrologia. (2009
Apr)

89.   Gonzales GF, Cordova A, Gonzales C, Chung A, Vega K, Villena A Lepidium meyenii (Maca) improved semen parameters in

adult men.. Asian J Androl. (2001-Dec)

90.   Gonzales GF, Córdova A, Vega K, Chung A, Villena A, Góñez C Effect of Lepidium meyenii (Maca), a root with aphrodisiac and

fertility-enhancing properties, on serum reproductive hormone levels in adult healthy men. J Endocrinol. (2003 Jan)

91.   Gonzales GF, Córdova A, Vega K, Chung A, Villena A, Góñez C, Castillo S Effect of Lepidium meyenii (MACA) on sexual desire

and its absent relationship with serum testosterone levels in adult healthy men. Andrologia. (2002 Dec)

92.   Maggio M, De Vita F, Lauretani F, Nouvenne A, Meschi T, Ticinesi A, Dominguez LJ, Barbagallo M, Dall'aglio E, Ceda GP The

Interplay between Magnesium and Testosterone in Modulating Physical Function in Men. Int J Endocrinol. (2014)

93.   Rotter I, Kosik-Bogacka D, Dołęgowska B, Safranow K, Karakiewicz B, Laszczyńska M Relationship between serum magnesium

concentration and metabolic and hormonal disorders in middle-aged and older men.. Magnes Res. (2015)

94.   Maggio M, Ceda GP, Lauretani F, Cattabiani C, Avantaggiato E, Morganti S, Ablondi F, Bandinelli S, Dominguez LJ, Barbagallo

M, Paolisso G, Semba RD, Ferrucci L Magnesium and anabolic hormones in older men. Int J Androl. (2011 Dec)

95.   Chandra AK, Sengupta P, Goswami H, Sarkar M Effects of dietary magnesium on testicular histology, steroidogenesis,

spermatogenesis and oxidative stress markers in adult rats.. Indian J Exp Biol. (2013-Jan)

96.   Cinar V, Polat Y, Baltaci AK, Mogulkoc R Effects of magnesium supplementation on testosterone levels of athletes and

sedentary subjects at rest and after exhaustion. Biol Trace Elem Res. (2011 Apr)

97.   Farsinejad-Marj M, Azadbakht L, Mardanian F, Saneei P, Esmaillzadeh A Clinical and Metabolic Responses to Magnesium

Supplementation in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.. Biol Trace Elem Res. (2020-Aug)

98.   Ford ES, Mokdad AH Dietary magnesium intake in a national sample of US adults. J Nutr. (2003 Sep)

99.   Musso CG Magnesium metabolism in health and disease. Int Urol Nephrol. (2009)

100.   Pham PC, Pham PM, Pham SV, Miller JM, Pham PT Hypomagnesemia in patients with type 2 diabetes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.

(2007 Mar)

101.   Diuretics. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. (2012-10)

102.   Sarafidis PA, Georgianos PI, Lasaridis AN Diuretics in clinical practice. Part II: electrolyte and acid-base disorders complicating

diuretic therapy. Expert Opin Drug Saf. (2010 Mar)

103.   Brown GA, Vukovich MD, Reifenrath TA, Uhl NL, Parsons KA, Sharp RL, King DS Effects of anabolic precursors on serum

testosterone concentrations and adaptations to resistance training in young men.. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. (2000-Sep)

104.   Brown GA, Vukovich MD, Martini ER, Kohut ML, Franke WD, Jackson DA, King DS Effects of androstenedione-herbal
supplementation on serum sex hormone concentrations in 30- to 59-year-old men.. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. (2001-Sep)

105.   Brown GA, Vukovich MD, Martini ER, Kohut ML, Franke WD, Jackson DA, King DS Endocrine and lipid responses to chronic

androstenediol-herbal supplementation in 30 to 58 year old men.. J Am Coll Nutr. (2001-Oct)

106.   Ma Y, Guo Z, Wang X extracts alleviate muscle damage and promote anaerobic performance of trained male boxers and its

mechanisms: Roles of androgen, IGF-1, and IGF binding protein-3.. J Sport Health Sci. (2017-Dec)

107.   Rogerson S, Riches CJ, Jennings C, Weatherby RP, Meir RA, Marshall-Gradisnik SM The effect of five weeks of Tribulus

terrestris supplementation on muscle strength and body composition during preseason training in elite rugby league players. J
Strength Cond Res. (2007 May)

108.   Neychev VK, Mitev VI The aphrodisiac herb Tribulus terrestris does not influence the androgen production in young men. J

Ethnopharmacol. (2005 Oct 3)

109.   Santos CA, Reis LO, Destro-Saade R, Luiza-Reis A, Fregonesi A Tribulus terrestris versus placebo in the treatment of erectile

dysfunction: A prospective, randomized, double blind study.. Actas Urol Esp. (2014-May)

110.   Sellandi TM, Thakar AB, Baghel MS Clinical study of Tribulus terrestris Linn. in Oligozoospermia: A double blind study. Ayu.

(2012 Jul)

111.   Kamenov Z, Fileva S, Kalinov K, Jannini EA Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of Tribulus terrestris in male sexual
dysfunction-A prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Maturitas. (2017 May)

112.   GamalEl Din SF, Abdel Salam MA, Mohamed MS, Ahmed AR, Motawaa AT, Saadeldin OA, Elnabarway RR Tribulus terrestris
versus placebo in the treatment of erectile dysfunction and lower urinary tract symptoms in patients with late-onset
hypogonadism: A placebo-controlled study. Urologia. (2018 Sep 25)

113.   Vale FBC, Zanolla Dias de Souza K, Rezende CR, Geber S Efficacy of Tribulus Terrestris for the treatment of premenopausal

women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder: a randomized double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Gynecol Endocrinol.

44

(2018 May)

114.   de Souza KZ, Vale FB, Geber S Efficacy of Tribulus terrestris for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in

postmenopausal women: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Menopause. (2016 Nov)

115.   Safarinejad MR Urtica dioica for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-

controlled, crossover study. J Herb Pharmacother. (2005)

116.   Santos HO, Howell S, Teixeira FJ Beyond tribulus (Tribulus terrestris L.): The effects of phytotherapics on testosterone, sperm

and prostate parameters.. J Ethnopharmacol. (2019-May-10)

117.   Shukla KK, Mahdi AA, Ahmad MK, Shankhwar SN, Rajender S, Jaiswar SP Mucuna pruriens improves male fertility by its action

on the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis. Fertil Steril. (2009 Dec)

118.   Meehan M, Penckofer S The Role of Vitamin D in the Aging Adult. J Aging Gerontol. (2014 Dec)

119.   Wacker M, Holick MF Sunlight and Vitamin D: A global perspective for health. Dermatoendocrinol. (2013 Jan 1)

120.   Mette Lorenzen, Ida Marie Boisen, Li Juel Mortensen, Beate Lanske, Anders Juul, Martin Blomberg Jensen Reproductive

endocrinology of vitamin D. Mol Cell Endocrinol. (2017 Sep 15)

121.   Chi Chen, Hualing Zhai, Jing Cheng, Pan Weng, Yi Chen, Qin Li, Chiyu Wang, Fangzhen Xia, Ningjian Wang, Yingli Lu Causal
Link Between Vitamin D and Total Testosterone in Men: A Mendelian Randomization Analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2019
Aug 1)

122.   Cristina de Angelis, Mariano Galdiero, Claudia Pivonello, Francesco Garifalos, Davide Menafra, Federica Cariati, Ciro Salzano,

Giacomo Galdiero, Mariangela Piscopo, Alfonso Vece, Annamaria Colao, Rosario Pivonello The role of vitamin D in male fertility: A
focus on the testis. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. (2017 Sep)

123.   S D'Andrea, A Martorella, F Coccia, C Castellini, E Minaldi, M Totaro, A Parisi, F Francavilla, S Francavilla, A Barbonetti

Relationship of Vitamin D status with testosterone levels: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocrine. (2021 Apr)

124.   Michelle S Rockwell, Madlyn I Frisard, Janet W Rankin, Jennifer S Zabinsky, Ryan P Mcmillan, Wen You, Kevin P Davy, Matthew
W Hulver Effects of Seasonal Vitamin D3 Supplementation on Strength, Power, and Body Composition in College Swimmers. Int
J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. (2020 Feb 4)

125.   Elham Hosseini Marnani, Mehdi Mollahosseini, Alireza Gheflati, Akram Ghadiri-Anari, Azadeh Nadjarzadeh The effect of vitamin
D supplementation on the androgenic profile in men: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Andrologia. (2019
Oct)

126.   Pilz S, Frisch S, Koertke H, Kuhn J, Dreier J, Obermayer-Pietsch B, Wehr E, Zittermann A Effect of vitamin D supplementation

on testosterone levels in men. Horm Metab Res. (2011 Mar)

127.   Jorde R, Grimnes G, Hutchinson MS, Kjærgaard M, Kamycheva E, Svartberg J Supplementation with vitamin D does not

increase serum testosterone levels in healthy males. Horm Metab Res. (2013 Sep)

128.   Annemieke C Heijboer, Mirjam Oosterwerff, Nicolas F Schroten, Elisabeth M W Eekhoff, Victor G M Chel, Rudolf A de Boer,

Marinus A Blankenstein, Paul Lips Vitamin D supplementation and testosterone concentrations in male human subjects. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). (2015 Jul)

129.   Soma Saha, Ravinder Goswami, Lakshmy Ramakrishnan, Sreenivas Vishnubhatla, Samrina Mahtab, Parmita Kar, Sunita

Srinivasan, Namrata Singh, Upinderpal Singh Vitamin D and calcium supplementation, skeletal muscle strength and serum
testosterone in young healthy adult males: Randomized control trial. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). (2018 Feb)

130.   Armin Zittermann, Jana B Ernst, Sylvana Prokop, Uwe Fuchs, Jens Dreier, Joachim Kuhn, Cornelius Knabbe, Heiner K Berthold,
Ioanna Gouni-Berthold, Jan F Gummert, Jochen Börgermann, Stefan Pilz Vitamin D supplementation does not prevent the
testosterone decline in males with advanced heart failure: the EVITA trial. Eur J Nutr. (2019 Mar)

131.   Elisabeth Lerchbaum, Stefan Pilz, Christian Trummer, Verena Schwetz, Oliver Pachernegg, Annemieke C Heijboer, Barbara

Obermayer-Pietsch Vitamin D and Testosterone in Healthy Men: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2017
Nov 1)

132.   Elisabeth Lerchbaum, Christian Trummer, Verena Theiler-Schwetz, Martina Kollmann, Monika Wölfler, Annemieke C Heijboer,

Stefan Pilz, Barbara Obermayer-Pietsch Effects of vitamin D supplementation on androgens in men with low testosterone levels:
a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Nutr. (2019 Dec)

133.   Christof Ulrich, Bogusz Trojanowicz, Roman Fiedler, Frank Bernhard Kraus, Gabriele I Stangl, Matthias Girndt, Eric Seibert

Serum Testosterone Levels Are Not Modified by Vitamin D Supplementation in Dialysis Patients and Healthy Subjects. Nephron.
(2021 Jun 9)

134.   Małgorzata Magdalena Michalczyk, Artur Gołaś, Adam Maszczyk, Piotr Kaczka, Adam Zając Influence of Sunlight and Oral D 3

Supplementation on Serum 25(OH)D Concentration and Exercise Performance in Elite Soccer Players. Nutrients. (2020 May 4)

135.   G W DeVane, N M Czekala, H L Judd, S S Yen Circulating gonadotropins, estrogens, and androgens in polycystic ovarian

disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol. (1975 Feb 15)

136.   C Longcope Adrenal and gonadal androgen secretion in normal females. Clin Endocrinol Metab. (1986 May)

137.   S Jafari-Sfidvajani, R Ahangari, M Hozoori, H Mozaffari-Khosravi, H Fallahzadeh, A Nadjarzadeh The effect of vitamin D
supplementation in combination with low-calorie diet on anthropometric indices and androgen hormones in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Endocrinol Invest. (2018 May)

138.   Shokoufeh Bonakdaran, Zahra Mazloom Khorasani, Behrooz Davachi, Javad Mazloom Khorasani The effects of calcitriol on

45

improvement of insulin resistance, ovulation and comparison with metformin therapy in PCOS patients: a randomized placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Iran J Reprod Med. (2012 Sep)

139.   Nazia Raja-Khan, Julie Shah, Christy M Stetter, Mary E J Lott, Allen R Kunselman, William C Dodson, Richard S Legro High-dose
vitamin D supplementation and measures of insulin sensitivity in polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomized, controlled pilot trial.
Fertil Steril. (2014 Jun)

140.   Gunjan Garg, Garima Kachhawa, Rekha Ramot, Rajesh Khadgawat, Nikhil Tandon, V Sreenivas, Alka Kriplani, N Gupta Effect of
vitamin D supplementation on insulin kinetics and cardiovascular risk factors in polycystic ovarian syndrome: a pilot study.
Endocr Connect. (2015 Jun)

141.   Maryam Maktabi, Maryam Chamani, Zatollah Asemi The Effects of Vitamin D Supplementation on Metabolic Status of Patients

with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Horm Metab Res. (2017 Jul)

142.   Christian Trummer, Verena Schwetz, Martina Kollmann, Monika Wölfler, Julia Münzker, Thomas R Pieber, Stefan Pilz,

Annemieke C Heijboer, Barbara Obermayer-Pietsch, Elisabeth Lerchbaum Effects of vitamin D supplementation on metabolic
and endocrine parameters in PCOS: a randomized-controlled trial. Eur J Nutr. (2019 Aug)

143.   Nahla Al-Bayyari, Hayder Al-Domi, Faheem Zayed, Ra'ed Hailat, Arieanna Eaton Androgens and hirsutism score of overweight

women with polycystic ovary syndrome improved after vitamin D treatment: A randomized placebo controlled clinical trial. Clin
Nutr. (2020 Sep 24)

144.   Lili Zhuang, Wei Cui, Jianxiang Cong, Yinghong Zhang Efficacy of Vitamin D Combined with Metformin and Clomiphene in the

Treatment of Patients with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Combined with Infertility. Iran J Public Health. (2019 Oct)

145.   Aafia Rashid, Mohd Ashraf Ganie, Imtiyaz Ahmad Wani, Gulzar Ahmad Bhat, Feroz Shaheen, Ishfaq Ahmed Wani, Mukesh

Shrivastava, Zaffar Amin Shah Differential Impact of Insulin Sensitizers vs. Anti-Androgen on Serum Leptin Levels in Vitamin D
Replete PCOS Women: A Six Month Open Labeled Randomized Study. Horm Metab Res. (2020 Feb)

146.   Zeeshan Javed, Maria Papageorgiou, Harshal Deshmukh, Eric S Kilpatrick, Vincent Mann, Lynsey Corless, George Abouda, Alan

S Rigby, Stephen L Atkin, Thozhukat Sathyapalan A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Vitamin D Supplementation on
Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Hormones, and Liver Markers in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Nutrients. (2019 Jan 17)

147.   van der Merwe J, Brooks NE, Myburgh KH Three weeks of creatine monohydrate supplementation affects dihydrotestosterone

to testosterone ratio in college-aged rugby players. Clin J Sport Med. (2009 Sep)

148.   Vatani DS, Faraji H, Soori R, Mogharnasi M The effects of creatine supplementation on performance and hormonal response in

amateur swimmers. Science & Sports. (2011)

149.   Arazi H, Rahmaninia F, Hosseini K, Asadi A Effects of short term creatine supplementation and resistance exercises on resting

hormonal and cardiovascular responses. Science & Sports. (2015)

150.   Cooke MB, Brabham B, Buford TW, Shelmadine BD, McPheeters M, Hudson GM, Stathis C, Greenwood M, Kreider R, Willoughby
DS Creatine supplementation post-exercise does not enhance training-induced adaptations in middle to older aged males. Eur
J Appl Physiol. (2014 Jun)

151.   Cook CJ, Crewther BT, Kilduff LP, Drawer S, Gaviglio CM Skill execution and sleep deprivation: effects of acute caffeine or

creatine supplementation - a randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. (2011 Feb 16)

152.   Crowe MJ, O'Connor DM, Lukins JE The effects of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) and HMB/creatine

supplementation on indices of health in highly trained athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. (2003 Jun)

153.   Hoffman J, Ratamess N, Kang J, Mangine G, Faigenbaum A, Stout J Effect of creatine and beta-alanine supplementation on

performance and endocrine responses in strength/power athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. (2006 Aug)

154.   Eijnde BO, Hespel P Short-term creatine supplementation does not alter the hormonal response to resistance training. Med Sci

Sports Exerc. (2001 Mar)

155.   Volek JS, Ratamess NA, Rubin MR, Gómez AL, French DN, McGuigan MM, Scheett TP, Sharman MJ, Häkkinen K, Kraemer WJ

The effects of creatine supplementation on muscular performance and body composition responses to short-term resistance
training overreaching. Eur J Appl Physiol. (2004 May)

156.   Volek JS, Boetes M, Bush JA, Putukian M, Sebastianelli W, Kraemer WJ Response of testosterone and cortisol concentrations to

high-intensity resistance exercise following creatine supplementation. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research. (1997)

157.   Rahimi R, Faraji H, Vatani DS, Qaderi M Creatine supplementation alters the hormonal response to resistance exercise.

Kinesiology. (2010)

158.   Faraji H, Arazi H, Vatani DS, Hakimi M The effects of creatine supplementation on sprint running performance and selected

hormonal responses. South African Journal for Research in Sport, Physical Education and Recreation. (2010)

159.   O'Leary CB, Hackney AC Acute and chronic effects of resistance exercise on the testosterone and cortisol responses in obese

males: a systematic review. Physiol Res. (2014)

160.   Kraemer WJ, Ratamess NA Hormonal responses and adaptations to resistance exercise and training. Sports Med. (2005)

161.   Wilson JM, Lowery RP, Joy JM, Walters JA, Baier SM, Fuller JC, Stout JR, Norton LE, Sikorski EM, Wilson SM, Duncan NM,

Zanchi NE, Rathmacher J β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate free acid reduces markers of exercise-induced muscle damage and
improves recovery in resistance-trained men. Br J Nutr. (2013 Jan 3)

162.   Hoffman JR, Cooper J, Wendell M, Im J, Kang J Effects of beta-hydroxy beta-methylbutyrate on power performance and

indices of muscle damage and stress during high-intensity training. J Strength Cond Res. (2004 Nov)

46

163.   Portal S, Zadik Z, Rabinowitz J, Pilz-Burstein R, Adler-Portal D, Meckel Y, Cooper DM, Eliakim A, Nemet D The effect of HMB
supplementation on body composition, fitness, hormonal and inflammatory mediators in elite adolescent volleyball players: a
prospective randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Eur J Appl Physiol. (2011 Sep)

164.   Slater GJ, Logan PA, Boston T, Gore CJ, Stenhouse A, Hahn AG Beta-hydroxy beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation

does not influence the urinary testosterone: epitestosterone ratio in healthy males. J Sci Med Sport. (2000 Mar)

165.   Cote KA, McCormick CM, Geniole SN, Renn RP, MacAulay SD Sleep deprivation lowers reactive aggression and testosterone in

men. Biol Psychol. (2013 Feb)

166.   Leproult R, Van Cauter E Effect of 1 week of sleep restriction on testosterone levels in young healthy men. JAMA. (2011 Jun 1)

167.   Penev PD Association between sleep and morning testosterone levels in older men. Sleep. (2007 Apr)

168.   González-Santos MR, Gajá-Rodríguez OV, Alonso-Uriarte R, Sojo-Aranda I, Cortés-Gallegos V Sleep deprivation and adaptive

hormonal responses of healthy men. Arch Androl. (1989)

169.   Cortés-Gallegos V, Castañeda G, Alonso R, Sojo I, Carranco A, Cervantes C, Parra A Sleep deprivation reduces circulating

androgens in healthy men. Arch Androl. (1983 Mar)

170.   Nedeltcheva AV, Kilkus JM, Imperial J, Schoeller DA, Penev PD Insufficient sleep undermines dietary efforts to reduce

adiposity. Ann Intern Med. (2010 Oct 5)

171.   Hackney AC, Aggon E Chronic Low Testosterone Levels in Endurance Trained Men: The Exercise- Hypogonadal Male

Condition. J Biochem Physiol. (2018)

172.   Grossmann M Low testosterone in men with type 2 diabetes: significance and treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2011 Aug)

173.   Hall SA, Esche GR, Araujo AB, Travison TG, Clark RV, Williams RE, McKinlay JB Correlates of low testosterone and symptomatic

androgen deficiency in a population-based sample. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2008 Oct)

174.   Grossmann M, Matsumoto AM A Perspective on Middle-Aged and Older Men With Functional Hypogonadism: Focus on Holistic

Management. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2017 Mar 1)

175.   Corona G, Rastrelli G, Monami M, Saad F, Luconi M, Lucchese M, Facchiano E, Sforza A, Forti G, Mannucci E, Maggi M Body
weight loss reverts obesity-associated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J
Endocrinol. (2013 May 2)

176.   Camacho EM, Huhtaniemi IT, O'Neill TW, Finn JD, Pye SR, Lee DM, Tajar A, Bartfai G, Boonen S, Casanueva FF, Forti G,
Giwercman A, Han TS, Kula K, Keevil B, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Vanderschueren D, Wu FC, EMAS Group Age-
associated changes in hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular function in middle-aged and older men are modified by weight change
and lifestyle factors: longitudinal results from the European Male Ageing Study. Eur J Endocrinol. (2013 Feb 20)

177.   Anderson RL, Wolf WJ Compositional changes in trypsin inhibitors, phytic acid, saponins and isoflavones related to soybean

processing. J Nutr. (1995 Mar)

178.   Erdman JW Jr, Badger TM, Lampe JW, Setchell KD, Messina M Not all soy products are created equal: caution needed in

interpretation of research results. J Nutr. (2004 May)

47

